DOCUMENT TITLE: Power Contract Between Quebec Hydro-Electric Commission and Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited
DATE: May 12, 1969
TYPE: Legal contract (conformed copy)
PARTIES: Quebec Hydro-Electric Commission ("Hydro-Quebec"), a body politic and corporate under the Hydro-Quebec Act (R.S.Q. 1964, chapter 86 as amended), head office at the City of Montreal, Province of Quebec; and Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited ("CFLCo"), a company incorporated under the laws of Canada, head office at the City of St. John's, Province of Newfoundland.
GOVERNING LAW: Province of Quebec
JURISDICTION: Courts of the Judicial District of Montreal, subject to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada
NOTE: This is a cleaned and structured version of the original OCR-scanned contract text. All substantive legal content is preserved. OCR artifacts have been corrected where identifiable.

---

ORIGINAL POWER CONTRACT (May 12, 1969)

---

ARTICLE I: INTERPRETATION

Section 1.1 - Definitions

TECHNICAL TERMS: "Billion" means one thousand million. "Energy" means electrical energy measured in kilowatt-hours. "Excessive Corona Losses" means that part of corona losses at any time exceeding 14 kilowatts per circuit mile. "Load Factor" means for any period the ratio expressed as a percentage of the average power over that period to the highest peak power in that period. "Mill" means 1/1000 of a dollar in lawful money of Canada. "Month" means a calendar month unless the context otherwise requires. "Power" means the rate at which energy is transferred at any point measured in kilowatts or multiples thereof. "Power Factor" means at a given point at any instant of time the number of kilowatts divided by the number of kilovolt-amperes. Other technical terms have meanings attributed by the American Standard Definitions of Electrical Terms Number ASA C42 published 1957 by the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and, to the extent not thereby defined, by The International Electro-Technical Vocabulary, second edition, 1956.

CONCERNING CONSTRUCTION OF THE PLANT: "Completion Date" means the first day of the first month on or after the Effective Date by which all of the following have occurred: (a) the eleven units at the Plant contemplated by Schedule I and all associated generating, transformation and transmission facilities have been installed; (b) the Plant has become capable of delivering energy at the Delivery Point at a rate of 2,625 million kilowatt-hours per month of 730 hours; (c) the Plant has become capable of making available at the Delivery Point at least 4,382,600 kilowatts in months other than June, July, August or September, or in June, July, August or September at least 4,163,500 kilowatts; and (d) an independent engineer has certified that the Plant has been completed and has these capabilities.

"Effective Date" means: (a) if by the date specified in Schedule II for completion of the eleventh unit, all eleven units and associated facilities are installed and each unit is ready to deliver or has delivered energy at the Delivery Point, and not more than three units are then inoperative, the date specified in Schedule II; or failing that (b) if earlier than December 31, 1978, the first day of the month following the date of such completion; or failing that (c) December 31, 1978.

"Plant" means the hydro-electric plant to be constructed by CFLCo at a site near Churchill Falls on the Upper Churchill River, having when completed at least those technical characteristics set forth in Schedule I. This includes all access roads, airports and runways, construction camps, permanent townsite and services, transport and communication facilities, water control and storage works, buildings and structures, machinery and equipment, spare parts, tools and maintenance material, and all transmission circuits of CFLCo.

CONCERNING CAPACITY: "Firm Capacity" means, subject to reduction by adjustment: (a) after the first Delivery Date and prior to the Effective Date, the number of kilowatts to be available to Hydro-Quebec as indicated in Schedule II; and (b) after the Effective Date, at any time in October through May 4,382,600 kilowatts at the Delivery Point, and at any time in June through September 4,163,500 kilowatts at the Delivery Point. "Minimum Capacity" means, after the sixth Delivery Date, 1,200,000 kilowatts.

CONCERNING ENERGY: "Annual Energy Base" means 31.50 billion kilowatt-hours per year, subject to adjustment. "Energy Payable" means: (a) prior to the Effective Date, the amount of energy taken by Hydro-Quebec or made available up to Schedule II amounts plus any excess energy taken; (b) after the Effective Date, the amount of energy taken by Hydro-Quebec during the month plus the energy equivalent of water spilled during the month. Such spillage shall not cause total Energy Payable for any 12-month period to exceed 35.4 billion kilowatt-hours minus the total amount of all prior recaptures.

CONCERNING RECAPTURE: "Recapture" means any withholding from the power and energy agreed to be sold which may be made by CFLCo in accordance with Section 6.6. "Recapture Notice" means any notice given by CFLCo to Hydro-Quebec of CFLCo's election to effect a recapture.

CONCERNING RATES: "Base Rate" means the unadjusted mill rate applicable at any time as stipulated by Section 8.1. "Applicable Rate" means the Base Rate as adjusted, calculated to the nearest 1/10,000 of a mill. "Final Capital Cost of the Plant" means the sum (less net salvage recoveries) of all amounts paid or payable by CFLCo for construction and bringing into operation of the Plant, incurred prior to the first anniversary of the Completion Date.

"Force Majeure" means: (a) any fortuitous event, act of governmental authority, act of public enemies, war, invasion, insurrection, riot, civil disturbance, labour trouble, strike; and (b) any flood, fire, shortage of labour, materials, or transport or other cause beyond reasonable control. Failure of equipment to perform adequately or improper operation of equipment shall not constitute Force Majeure.

Section 1.2 - Applicable Law: This Power Contract shall be governed by the laws of the Province of Quebec. The only competent courts are those of the Judicial District of Montreal, subject to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.

Section 1.7 - Letter of Intent: The Letter of Intent executed between the parties on October 13, 1966 is fully superseded and replaced.

---

ARTICLE II: OBJECT

Section 2.1: During the existence of this Power Contract, Hydro-Quebec agrees to purchase from CFLCo and CFLCo agrees to sell to Hydro-Quebec each month: (i) prior to the Effective Date, at least the energy indicated in Schedule II and the Firm Capacity; and (ii) from and after the Effective Date, the Energy Payable and the Firm Capacity; all at the prices, terms, conditions, and provisions set forth herein.

---

ARTICLE III: TERM AND RENEWAL

Section 3.1 - Term: This Power Contract shall expire on the later of (a) the 44th anniversary of the first Delivery Date, and (b) the 40th anniversary of the Effective Date.

Section 3.2 - Renewal of Contract: This Power Contract shall be renewed for a further term of 25 years from the expiry date. The renewed Power Contract shall be that set forth in Schedule III, which shall come into force automatically without any further signature being required. Any Articles or Sections of this Power Contract other than Section 3.2, as well as any undertakings or promises not specifically contained in Schedule III, shall have no force and effect beyond the expiry date.

---

ARTICLE IV: CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF THE PLANT

Section 4.1 - Construction: Hydro-Quebec shall furnish design characteristics and criteria for transmission facilities to the Delivery Point. Components affecting economy or reliability of Hydro-Quebec's system shall have characteristics mutually agreed after joint consultation. CFLCo shall cause the Plant to be constructed in accordance with sound utility practice and Schedule I characteristics.

Section 4.2 - Operation: The parties acknowledge it is desirable for Hydro-Quebec to have operational flexibility of CFLCo's facilities. Hydro-Quebec may request CFLCo to operate the Plant to supply its power requirements schedule, provided no request is less than Minimum Capacity or more than Firm Capacity. Hydro-Quebec may require deliveries varying the water in storage provided sufficient water remains for Minimum Capacity. CFLCo agrees to make available hydrology information and cooperate fully in forecasting available energy.

Existing Obligations: Hydro-Quebec acknowledges CFLCo's obligations to Twin Falls Power Corporation Limited covering 225,000 kilowatts at 100% load factor, which shall not constitute recapture.

Maintenance: CFLCo shall maintain all facilities in good repair per sound utility practice. Hydro-Quebec shall have access to verify compliance.

Right of Hydro-Quebec to Operate: Should CFLCo be unwilling to operate the Plant (not prevented by Force Majeure), Hydro-Quebec shall have the right to cause the Plant to be operated for CFLCo's account.

---

ARTICLE VI: ENERGY, FIRM CAPACITY AND RECAPTURE

Section 6.1 - Energy Characteristics: Three phase 60 hertz alternating current at approximately 735,000 volts at the Delivery Point under normal operating conditions.

Section 6.4 - Firm Capacity: Shall be available at all times when Hydro-Quebec has requested it. Additional capacity shall also be available on request whenever CFLCo can make it available.

Section 6.6 - Recapture: CFLCo may, on not less than three years prior written notice, elect to withhold blocks at a specified load factor per month (not less than 60% nor more than 90%) which in aggregate shall not exceed 300,000 kilowatts for a maximum withholding of 2.362 billion kilowatt-hours per year, provided that: (i) energy withheld is sold only for consumption outside the Province of Quebec; (ii) any part becoming available for Hydro-Quebec may be purchased at specified rates; and (iii) withholding before the seventh Delivery Date shall not relieve CFLCo from Schedule II commitments.

---

ARTICLE VII: DELIVERY

Section 7.1 - Delivery Point: At the height of land, about opposite present Mile 148.8 on the Quebec North Shore and Labrador Railway, which is the presumed watershed between the St. Lawrence River and the Churchill River.

Section 7.2 - Transmission Facilities: Up to the Delivery Point is CFLCo's exclusive responsibility and cost. Onwards from the Delivery Point is Hydro-Quebec's exclusive responsibility and cost.

---

ARTICLE VIII: RATE AND PRICE

Section 8.1 - Base Rate: After the Effective Date, the Base Rate shall be: for the first 5 years, 2.7734 mills per kilowatt-hour; thereafter for the next 5 years, 2.7110 mills per kilowatt-hour; thereafter for the next 5 years, 2.6591 mills per kilowatt-hour; thereafter for the next 10 years, 2.5449 mills per kilowatt-hour; and thereafter 2.3787 mills per kilowatt-hour.

NOTE: The Base Rate DECREASES over the life of the contract, from 2.7734 mills (0.27734 cents) per kWh initially to 2.3787 mills (0.23787 cents) per kWh for the final period.

Section 8.2 - Applicable Rates: The Base Rate is subject to adjustment based on the Final Capital Cost of the Plant relative to benchmark costs of $728,000,000 and $791,000,000.

Section 8.3 - Price Prior to Effective Date: Monthly price for Energy Payable is 2.8253 mills per kWh for 90% of energy made available plus 1.0000 mill per kWh for the remaining 10%, plus 0.5000 mill per kWh for excess energy taken.

Section 8.4 - Price After the Effective Date: Monthly price shall be (i) the Basic Contract Demand multiplied by 66.67% of the Applicable Rate (earned whether or not taken or made available), plus (ii) Energy Payable multiplied by 33.33% of the Applicable Rate.

Section 8.5 - Direct Price Adjustments: During recapture notice periods, price is reduced by 0.27 mill per kWh for the recaptured portion. Additional adjustments based on variations between Annual Energy Base and actual annual average Energy Payable, with refunds or supplementary payments calculated over 8-year and subsequent 4-year periods.

---

ARTICLE X: FIRM CAPACITY PENALTY

Penalties for capacity deficiencies: more than 30 minutes but not more than 4 hours, $10 per megawatt; more than 4 hours but not more than 10 hours, $20 per megawatt; 24 hours or more, $40 per megawatt day. No penalty applies for deficiencies less than 1% of requested capacity, due to Excessive Corona Losses, due to disturbances on the Hydro-Quebec system, for safeguarding human life, where Hydro-Quebec can substitute capacity at no material cost increase, or resulting from lack of water other than by failure of impounding structures.

---

ARTICLE XII: DEBT SERVICE REQUIREMENT AND EXPENSE CHARGES

Hydro-Quebec shall advance to CFLCo funds required for Debt Service Requirement and Expense Charges when CFLCo lacks sufficient unrestricted funds. For each $1,000 advanced, Hydro-Quebec receives one Debenture of $1,000 principal and five common shares of CFLCo. This obligation continues for so long as any Debt Service Requirement exists.

---

ARTICLE XV: INTEREST CHARGES

Should the Effective Interest Rate on First Mortgage Bonds exceed 5.5% per annum or on other Debt Obligations exceed 6% per annum, the excess portion shall be borne by Hydro-Quebec.

---

ARTICLE XVII: FORCE MAJEURE

No event of Force Majeure or default shall give rise to or result in termination of this Power Contract. However, Hydro-Quebec must still make required advances under Articles V and XII notwithstanding Force Majeure.

---

ARTICLE XX: USE OF QUEBEC PERSONNEL, SERVICES AND MATERIALS

CFLCo will extend preference to Quebec labour, personnel, services, materials and equipment. In purchase of major equipment such as turbines, generators, and transformers, next preference goes to other Canadian manufacturers after Quebec preference.

---

ARTICLE XXI: CASE OF CFLCo BEING UNABLE TO COMPLETE PROJECT

If it becomes evident CFLCo cannot complete the Project per Schedule II, Hydro-Quebec shall have the right to require CFLCo to cooperate to permit Hydro-Quebec to implement the Project on behalf of CFLCo, provided Hydro-Quebec did not cause the inability.

---

CONTRACT EXECUTION

Signed by Quebec Hydro-Electric Commission (J.-C. Lessard, Y. Deguise) and Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited (D. J. McParland, E. G. Lambert).

---

SCHEDULE I: MAIN TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS

The Plant includes reservoirs and forebay, an intake structure, eleven penstocks, an underground powerhouse containing eleven generating units, a manifold surge chamber, tailrace tunnels, all associated switching and transformation facilities, and transmission lines.

Reservoirs include the Main Reservoir (Sandgirt and Lobstick Lakes, Michikamau, Orma and Sail Lakes) and the Ossokmanuan Reservoir.

---

SCHEDULE III: RENEWED POWER CONTRACT (Automatic 25-Year Renewal)

This schedule constitutes the complete terms of the automatic renewal that comes into force upon expiry of the original Power Contract without any further signature required.

ARTICLE I: INTERPRETATION

Section 1.1 - Definitions: "Continuous Energy" means the number of kilowatt-hours obtained when the Annual Energy Base in effect at the time of the expiry of the original Power Contract is multiplied by the number of days in the month and divided by the number of days in the year. Other definitions including Deficiency, Firm Capacity, Minimum Capacity, and Force Majeure carry forward from the original Power Contract.

ARTICLE II: OBJECT

Section 2.1: During the entire term, Hydro-Quebec agrees to purchase from CFLCo and CFLCo agrees to sell to Hydro-Quebec each month the Continuous Energy and the Firm Capacity, at the price, terms, and conditions set forth herein.

ARTICLE III: TERM

Section 3.1: This Power Contract shall expire on the 25th anniversary of the date of expiry of the original Power Contract.

ARTICLE IV: OPERATION OF THE PLANT

Same operational flexibility provisions as the original contract, with Hydro-Quebec having operational control within Firm Capacity and Minimum Capacity limits. CFLCo retains maintenance obligations. Hydro-Quebec retains right to operate the Plant if CFLCo is unwilling and not prevented by Force Majeure.

ARTICLE V: ENERGY, FIRM CAPACITY AND RECAPTURE

Energy characteristics remain three phase 60 hertz at approximately 735,000 volts. Firm Capacity available at all times on request. Recapture provisions carry forward: CFLCo may withhold on three years notice, blocks not exceeding 300,000 kilowatts for maximum 2.362 billion kWh per year (after accounting for recaptures under original contract), only for consumption outside Quebec. Hydro-Quebec may purchase any available recaptured energy at 1 mill (0.1 cents) per kWh.

ARTICLE VI: DELIVERY

Delivery Point shall be as at the time of expiry of the original Power Contract. Transmission facilities up to Delivery Point are CFLCo's responsibility and cost; from Delivery Point onward are Hydro-Quebec's responsibility and cost.

ARTICLE VII: PRICE AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT

Section 7.1: For all Continuous Energy, Hydro-Quebec shall pay CFLCo 2.0 mills per kilowatt-hour (0.2 cents per kWh). If CFLCo is unable due to Plant deficiencies to make available at least 90% of Continuous Energy in any month, the price applies only to the portion actually made available.

Section 7.2 - Direct Price Adjustment: During any recapture notice period, the monthly price for Continuous Energy shall be reduced by 0.27 mill per kWh for the recaptured portion.

NOTE: The renewal price of 2.0 mills (0.2 cents) per kWh is LOWER than all Base Rates in the original contract, which ranged from 2.7734 to 2.3787 mills per kWh.

ARTICLE VIII: FIRM CAPACITY PENALTY

Same penalty structure as original contract: $10 per megawatt for 30 minutes to 4 hours deficiency, $20 per megawatt for 4-10 hours, $40 per megawatt day for 24+ hours. Same exemptions apply.

ARTICLE X: FORCE MAJEURE

No event of Force Majeure or default shall give rise to termination of this renewed Power Contract.

ARTICLE XII: ASSIGNMENT

Neither party may assign except to a successor corporation through merger, amalgamation, or corporate reorganization, or as security to trustees for debt obligations, or to a wholly-owned subsidiary with Hydro-Quebec's written consent.

ARTICLE XIII: USE OF QUEBEC PERSONNEL, SERVICES AND MATERIALS

Same preference provisions: Quebec labour, personnel, services, materials and equipment receive first preference, followed by other Canadian manufacturers for major equipment purchases.

ARTICLE XIV: NOTICES

Hydro-Quebec at 75 Dorchester Boulevard West, Montreal 1, P.Q. CFLCo at One Westmount Square, Westmount 6, P.Q. Either party may designate a new address by notice to the other.

---

KEY CONTRACT TERMS SUMMARY

Original contract term: The later of 44 years from first Delivery Date or 40 years from Effective Date. Automatic renewal: 25 additional years under Schedule III terms with no renegotiation required.

Original contract Base Rates (decreasing schedule): First 5 years 2.7734 mills per kWh, next 5 years 2.7110, next 5 years 2.6591, next 10 years 2.5449, and thereafter 2.3787 mills per kWh.

Renewal contract price: 2.0 mills per kWh (0.2 cents per kWh) for all Continuous Energy, with no escalation or indexation provisions.

Annual Energy Base: 31.50 billion kWh per year. Maximum Energy Payable cap: 35.4 billion kWh per year (original contract). Firm Capacity: 4,382,600 kW in October-May, 4,163,500 kW in June-September. Minimum Capacity: 1,200,000 kW. Recapture right: Up to 300,000 kW or 2.362 billion kWh per year, on 3 years notice, for sale only outside Quebec.

Contract cannot be terminated by Force Majeure or default. Governed by Quebec law with Montreal jurisdiction. Hydro-Quebec has right to operate Plant if CFLCo is unwilling. CFLCo must give preference to Quebec labour, services, and materials.
