DOCUMENT TITLE: The Assessment of the Proposed Projects Under the MOU
AUTHOR: Dr. Doug May
DATE: 2026-01-19
DOCUMENT TYPE: Presentation / Detailed Analysis
TOPIC: Detailed assessment of proposed infrastructure projects under the Churchill Falls MOU, including Gull Island, CF Expansion, CF Upgrade, and transmission line — focusing on financing, debt, data gaps, and strategic implications

---

INITIAL STATEMENT

In January 2025, Dr. Wade Locke released an in-depth "Assessment" of the December 12, 2024 MOU between the governments of Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador. In his assessment, Wade was constrained by the information contained in the MOU or publicly available. Dr. Wade Locke wrote in his conclusion: "There is not sufficient information in the MOU to thoroughly evaluate all, or any, of the proposed new developments." (Source: W. Locke, An Assessment of the December 12, 2024, Churchill Falls MOU between Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec, Jan. 2025, p.19.)

Having thoroughly reviewed the material, May agrees with Wade's statement. May's analysis has been heavily limited by the lack of critical data or the potential unreliability of such data. Attempts to obtain necessary data from Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro have been unsuccessful. The key point is that more information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed infrastructure projects using accepted professional standards.

---

MISSING INFORMATION

Some of the missing information includes prices for the electricity outputs of Gull Island or the CF Enlargement. Surprisingly, the CF Upgrade is included in the existing prices. Also absent is any data on operating costs and their timing. There is no information on the expected lifespan of the infrastructure projects. As a result, net present value analysis or cost-benefit analysis cannot be performed. Among the input costs, the suggestion of any increase in water rents or royalties is ignored in the MOU, although NLH has informed May that such rates are being "modernized."

---

RISK AND UNCERTAINTY

Although the prices for existing power are presented as forecasted, they are presented as certainty-equivalent base prices — the prices might be higher but they will not be lower. Implicit is that Newfoundlanders and Labradorians do not care about the risks associated with hydro projects. If there are cost overruns, HQ may accept the additional costs. But could costs be lower? Could financing costs of debt be higher for the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador?

One of the greatest risks that might affect any new hydro developments is changes in water levels and flows due to climate change. Decreasing water flows have recently been a major problem for HQ. Has the same drought phenomenon affected the Churchill River system, which is further to the east of Quebec's La Grande generating stations? Hydraulic electricity generation in NL from January to July 2025 is 15% lower than in the same period in 2024.

The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, in its publication "Our Chapter" (Slide 9), states with respect to the proposed Gull Island hydro project that an Environmental Assessment was conducted in 2012 following extensive and rigorous environmental review. However, in 2021, did HQ forecast that electricity production would decline from 2023 onwards? May argues that there are risks and the public does care about future risks, especially when they or their children (future generations) are on the hook for such costs.

A lot has happened in the economy since December 2024. Have tariffs affected any of the development cost estimates?

---

PROJECT DETAILS AND FINANCING

Although the projects are separated in the MOU, in economic analysis, Gull Island cannot be separated from the proposed transmission line.

The three proposed generating projects are to be financed by 25% equity and 75% debt. The transmission line is entirely the responsibility of Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro (NLH). While the debt is NLH's responsibility, its debt obligations are guaranteed by the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador (GNL).

CAPITAL COSTS AND DEBT TABLE (from Locke's Table 11):

| Project | Capital Costs ($B) | Equity (25%) | NLH Equity Share | Debt (75%) | NL Debt |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Gull Island Generating Station | $24.900 | $6.23 | $3.735 | $18.68 | $11.21 |
| Churchill Falls Expansion | $4.600 | $1.15 | $0.757 | $3.45 | $2.27 |
| Churchill Falls Upgrade | $1.900 | $0.48 | $0.313 | $1.43 | $0.94 |
| Churchill Falls Transmission | $3.600 | $0.90 | $0.900 | $2.70 | $2.70 |
| SUBTOTAL - New Developments | $35.000 | $8.75 | $5.704 | $26.25 | $17.11 |

Source: W. Locke, An Assessment of the December 12, 2024, Churchill Falls MOU between Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec, Jan. 2025, p.19

May concurs with Wade Locke that the potential direct debt of some $17 billion, and the potential additional financial obligations associated with the CF upgrade and the transmission lines, are very substantial. Given that the primary use of the additional power is for Quebec households and industries (as part of an industrial strategy), it is not clear why the NL public would want to continue the subsidization of low-cost electricity for Quebec.

HQ purchases 40% of the equity in Gull Island for $4.8 billion nominal dollars, which is equivalent to $3.5 billion in present value terms, with a 5.8% discount rate and 2024 as the base year.

---

HQ'S PROFIT-MAXIMIZING STRATEGY

Claudine Bouchard, the CEO of Hydro-Québec, was recently quoted in the Montreal Gazette: "At some point, they're (northeastern U.S. markets) going to need energy because of the data centres and all that, so this new energy economy will be very different in the next decade, so we have to prepare for that in order to get all the opportunities that we can get from that new market."

So, is HQ's profit-making strategy to buy cheap electric power from a company, namely CF(L)Co or Gull Island, in which it is a substantial minority shareholder, and sell it into U.S. markets at much higher prices? Export prices for power are highest in the winter months.

---

LOAD FACTORS AND SEASONAL TARGETING

PROPOSED GENERATING INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS:

| Project | Capacity | Forecasted Annual Generation | Implied Load Factor |
|---|---|---|---|
| Gull Island | 2250 MWh | 12.0 TWh | 60.88% |
| CF Expansion | 1100 MWh | 0.4 TWh | 4.15% |
| CF Upgrade | 500 MWh | 1.0 TWh | 22.83% |

Locke estimates the current load factor from Churchill Falls to be about 72%, and this appears to be consistent with Parsons' forecasted prices. NLH and HQ estimate the average annual load of the 3 projects to be just shy of 40%.

HQ's sensible strategy is to generate the most electricity in the winter, when it is most needed by Quebec households and other users, and when it can be exported or re-exported (using Churchill Falls electricity) into New England and New York. These estimated load factors imply winter usage when higher prices prevail in U.S. markets.

---

OBSERVATIONS AND QUESTIONS

To what extent does the NL public want NLH to be a profit-making enterprise? There are challenges if it does, since it is selling power to a primarily cost-minimizing public utility that is buying power from a company in which it is a substantial shareholder.

Are the projected costs subject to change because of changes in purchased imported capital goods, such as turbines?

As Locke correctly points out, Net Present Value (NPV) estimates for these projects would require project timelines with detailed projected costs, including capital costs and other costs such as labour, with alternative scenarios. Such information must be made available to independent reviewers and the public.

As Carney points out in his book Value(s), cost-benefit analysis should be conducted to determine the economic gains to consumers, businesses, and government within Newfoundland and Labrador. One might also consider equity considerations on Indigenous peoples and on those NL households currently living in poverty. The question is: Will the development or the existence of the proposed projects increase the economic well-being or overall well-being of these groups?

The $3.8 billion transmission line project (whose costs fall entirely to NLH) must be considered part of the Gull Island project, as they are not independent. Gull Island power cannot leave the generating station without the line.

Given the low load factors, the additional power is targeted to specific months. These patterns suggest that electricity would be targeted to markets with high seasonal prices. These projects could be very profitable to HQ. Monthly output projections and distributions should be produced for the first ten years.

Much more detail is needed regarding employment — by occupation and compensation level — since labour markets for large construction projects are expected to be very tight over the next fifteen years.

---

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Hydro-Québec is in a very tough situation. Its electricity production from hydroelectric stations has fallen substantially over the past three years. HQ's access to very cheap water resources permits users in Quebec to enjoy the lowest electricity prices in North America. HQ has gone from a net exporter of electricity to its traditional U.S. markets to a net importer from them. HQ apparently expects its electricity demand in Quebec to double over the next 25 years. Presumably, because of limited ideal water resources in Quebec, it is turning to wind power. Quebec has always been a net importer of electricity, and its historic primary source of imported electricity has been Churchill Falls.

Given this, it is natural that HQ would turn to the Churchill River and its part ownership of CF(L)Co to obtain security of an additional supply of very cheap electricity. While the extra electricity is primarily to meet Québec's needs, the MOU proposes that NLH (more generally, the people of NL) finance its share of the projects by primarily (75% of its share) incurring debt. Since there is no information on the pricing structure for any additional electricity produced, it is not clear what the benefit would be to the people of NL of taking on such a large debt, especially when they are only too familiar with debts arising from recent hydroelectric developments.

The strategy in the MOU of offering increased compensation for existing power for jointly undertaking new projects is not new; it is a repeat of previous efforts over the past few decades.

It is not possible to properly evaluate any or all of the proposed developments under the MOU. Much more information is needed. May concurs with Wade Locke's conclusions.

The massive debt that NLH must incur, and potentially add to the current high provincial debt, to bring the proposed projects to completion, should be of great concern to the residents of NL. Incurring debt costs for electricity that is to be exported represents a subsidy to external buyers. Is it the few Newfoundlanders and Labradorians subsidizing the many Quebecers?

The NL public must wonder why they are continuing to finance projects designed to continue to supply cheap electricity to Quebec for domestic consumption and re-export to lucrative markets in the USA.

The proposed upgrade to the CF project may increase, at least, the benefit from existing power before 2041.

The ultimate question is: Is the MOU of December 12, 2024, the Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement (BATNA)? Additional information on the proposals in the MOU is needed, and new, viable alternatives must be considered.

The NL public should re-examine the role of NLH as a publicly-owned entity focused on delivering reliable, low-cost power to meet their needs rather than incurring substantial debt to meet the needs of others in Québec at subsidized rates lower than they pay for electricity using a valuable and ever-increasingly scarce resource, namely water.

---

ACRONYMS:
MOU — Memorandum of Understanding (December 12, 2024, between Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador)
CF — Churchill Falls Generating Station
CF(L)Co — Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation
NLH — Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro
GNL — Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
HQ — Hydro-Québec
NPV — Net Present Value
PV — Present Value
BATNA — Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement
NE — New England
NY — New York
