DOCUMENT TITLE: Hydro-Québec's Exports: Update, October and November 2025
AUTHOR: Dr. Doug May
DOCUMENT TYPE: Statistical Analysis / Summary Findings
TOPIC: Updated analysis of Hydro-Québec's declining electricity exports, rising imports, changing trade patterns with the USA, and pricing data with implications for Churchill Falls MOU

---

SUMMARY: THE NOOSE CONTINUES TO TIGHTEN ON HQ

Falling Exports: Even with imports adding to the available electricity, with falling supply, there is little room for exports for many months. During March-June 2025, less than 4% of the total available was exportable, while in March-June 2022, at least 12% was available. Exports by HQ to the USA in October were almost 92% lower than the same month three years earlier. The decline was spread along HQ's markets in Vermont, New York State, and Maine, with Vermont being the primary market. HQ's exports spike in the colder winter when demand and prices are high, presenting an opportunity for HQ to make substantial profits during this period.

PERCENTAGE CHANGES IN HQ'S EXPORTS (October):
- Total Exports: +14.8% year-over-year; -68.6% from October 2022
- Exports to Other Provinces: +22.2% year-over-year; -29.1% from October 2022
- Exports to the USA: -12.5% year-over-year; -91.9% from October 2022

---

DECLINING EXPORT CAPACITY

Almost all of the electricity available (including CF) is increasingly needed to meet domestic needs. This leaves little electricity for export, including that needed for long-term commitments to other provinces, principally New Brunswick.

Most of the electricity produced in Quebec comes from Hydro-Québec's operations. HQ does the importing and exporting. The data show a general decline in the export of available power by HQ. HQ and Quebec are net importers of electricity, and Churchill Falls is a significant (and very inexpensive) source of those imports.

The amount of electricity available for export in October was down by 5.5 percentage points from a year earlier and 14.6 percentage points from that month three years earlier.

---

EXPORT MARKET DETAILS

According to the Canada Energy Regulator data, Vermont seems to be the dominant export market for HQ with NY State not far behind. Exports to Maine from HQ seem sporadic. CER data report no significant sales from Quebec into New England ISO. However, HQ Quarterly reports often refer to New England ISO and the prices it receives there. It is not clear why HQ refers to NE-ISO when CER reports no exports there.

NLH seems to be taking over the NE market according to CER and increasing its exports into NY.

---

COMPARATIVE EXPORT DATA: QUEBEC VS. NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR

The amount of electricity that Quebec exports to the USA has been much larger than what Newfoundland and Labrador has exported. Once electricity is in the grid, it is likely impossible to say where it was generated. The decrease by Hydro-Quebec in its electricity sales to the USA over the last four years is remarkable. While most people might believe that Quebec is a net exporter of electricity to the USA, it is actually a net importer.

HQ has invested vast amounts of money over the past couple of years constructing and upgrading transmission lines into the USA. It promotes hydroelectricity as green energy.

It is interesting that it is NL and not Quebec that ships electricity into New England. Quebec had entered into agreements with NE-ISO to export cheap green hydroelectric power into states such as Massachusetts, building new transmission lines through Maine which were very controversial due to environmental concerns.

REFERENCE: In early 2026, a kWh of electricity is about 33¢ US or 45.5¢ Canadian. This price is about 3 times the current price to households in St. John's.

---

PRICING DATA CONCERNS

The pattern of export prices into selective US markets using Canada Energy Regulator data seems to be increasingly inconsistent and unreliable. Issues include negative trade prices, extremely high prices in one market but not others, and price times quantity not equaling value when dealing with exports from NL but equaling value for exports from Quebec. Repeated email requests and phone calls to CER in Calgary have been met with silence or a non-response.

Reliable price data are necessary for determining the potential value of Churchill River electricity and water rents. These data problems must be resolved before any adjustment price process for electricity outlined in subsequent negotiations can be implemented.

If there is a seasonal price pattern, export prices are the highest in the coldest months and then increase somewhat in July and August. Since electricity production and exports follow seasonal patterns, prices should not be set annually but seasonally, which is what Hydro-Québec does in its export markets and is moving toward in its domestic markets.

---

HQ PRICING DATA FROM MID-YEAR REPORT

HQ's mid-year report aligns with Stats Canada sales data and CER price data for HQ sales into NY. NLH price data into the NY market for the same first six months was 8.7¢/kWh. The question arises: why in the first six months of 2025 was the average sale price for HQ power into NY State 15.81¢/kWh while NLH power was 8.2¢/kWh? Possible explanation: transmission costs.

HQ stated in its semi-annual 2025 report: "The company increased electricity exports to take advantage of high prices in a context marked by strong demand." Weather conditions experienced during the first few months of the year caused energy prices to increase overall.

---

PERCENTAGE CHANGES IN HQ'S IMPORTS AND EXPORTS WITH NEW YORK STATE, YTD (November):
- Exports to NY: -37.0% from same YTD 2024; -89.6% from same YTD 2022
- Imports from NY: +75.0% from same YTD 2024; +691.5% from same YTD 2022

Storyline: Exports are falling and imports are rising.

PERCENTAGE CHANGES IN PRICES OF HQ'S IMPORTS FROM NEW YORK STATE, YTD (November) 2025:
- Imports from NY: +84.6% from same YTD 2024; -47.2% from same YTD 2022

The cost of importing electricity into Quebec from the USA has risen.

---

QUESTIONS ON EXPORTS

Why are CER data on exports not consistent with HQ information? CER states that no electricity is exported to NE-ISO, but HQ's 2025 semester report says it is their primary customer. Why the difference?

Why in the first six months of 2025 was the average sale price for HQ power into NY State 15.81¢/kWh while NLH power was 8.2¢/kWh? Is the difference due to transmission costs?

Why are CER's export data for New York State not consistent — that is, price times quantity does not equal value — when it is consistent in other cases?

---

THE BOTTOM LINE

HQ has a reputation as an energy powerhouse able to provide clean energy and meet the needs of markets in the USA. HQ's exports continue to fall due primarily to declining hydroelectric production resulting from the continuing drought. Exporting electricity is profitable at any time but particularly in the winter months when prices are high. A key component of this process is using hydro reservoirs as storage batteries.

Any "profit" is used by HQ to reduce electricity prices to its domestic customers. Quebec follows profit-maximizing principles in operating outside Quebec. The key to making all this strategy work is very cheap and abundant power from CF. It is a necessity for HQ. It is natural and rational that Hydro-Quebec can best meet its supply shortfalls by increasing production at CF and Gull Island.

---

SUMMARY

This declining generation has led HQ to curtail exports to the USA and increase its power imports from New York State. HQ is currently a net importer with the USA. This is a significant change in historical patterns.

Prices of imports from and exports to the USA are generally rising. This increases the relative attractiveness of Churchill Falls power with its very low, relatively fixed cost.

---

DATA SOURCES: Statistics Canada, Tables 25-10-0015-01 and 25-10-0016-01; Canada Energy Regulator (https://apps.cer-rec.gc.ca/CommodityStatistics/ViewReport.aspx); HQ Mid-Year Statement 2025

ACRONYMS:
HQ — Hydro-Québec
CF — Churchill Falls Generating Station
CF(L)Co — Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation
NLH — Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro
NL — Newfoundland and Labrador
NB — New Brunswick
GNL — Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
MOU — Memorandum of Understanding (December 12, 2024)
CER — Canada Energy Regulator
NE-ISO — New England Independent System Operator
NY — New York
