DOCUMENT TITLE: Québec's Changing Import Picture
AUTHOR: Dr. Doug May
DOCUMENT TYPE: Presentation / Data Analysis (CRPP Series, follows Video #3-A)
DATE: 2026-01-13
TOPIC: Analysis of Hydro-Québec's changing electricity import patterns, with focus on growing U.S. imports and implications for Churchill Falls negotiations

---

THE ROLE OF CHURCHILL FALLS IN QUEBEC'S ELECTRICITY PICTURE

Churchill Falls electricity is a necessary "import" to Hydro-Québec. It guarantees Quebec a long-term, secure, and extremely cheap source of electricity to meet its own domestic needs and to profitably export electricity to New Brunswick and particularly to the USA. CF electricity enables HQ to provide Quebec households and businesses with the cheapest power in Canada and the G7, including the USA. Some would say that NL "subsidizes" Quebec's low electricity prices. The key to CF electricity's low price is the almost free cost of the vast water resources of the Churchill River. As the former Government of Newfoundland and Labrador wrote in its "Our Chapter" document, it hopes the MOU will unlock the "value" of CF.

---

HQ'S IMPORT PICTURE: 2022 AND EARLIER

In 2022, 14.0% of the electricity available to Quebec came from imports. Of that, 13.7% of the available power came from other provinces — some from Ontario but the vast majority from Churchill Falls. Only 0.3% came from the USA. Before 2022, HQ rarely imported power from the USA.

---

THE RESTRUCTURING OF HQ'S IMPORT PICTURE: 2024 AND 2025

In the first ten months of 2025, total imports were up 3.5% from the same period the previous year. Imports from other provinces were down 13.3% during this period. It is not clear why this is occurring since most of this imported power likely comes from Churchill Falls. This power is absolutely and relatively cheaper than power from elsewhere, raising the question of why the decline occurred when total imports increased.

In 2024, 17.4% of the electricity available to Quebec came from imports. Of that, 15.7% of the available power came from other provinces. An approximate estimation is that about 31.5 TWh of electricity imported into Quebec in 2024 came from Churchill Falls. This represented about 80.6% of the total imported power. The remaining 1.7% came from the USA.

KEY FINDING: In the first ten months of 2025, imports from the USA were up 128.9%. During this period, imports from the USA were greater than exports by 38.8%. Traditionally, exports to the USA are greater than imports. This is an amazing change in electricity trading patterns with the USA.

---

IMPORTS FROM VERMONT AND NEW YORK STATE

The data illustrate remarkable changes in import patterns. Imports from New York State started to play a continuing and more significant role beginning in 2023. Imports from Vermont came into the picture in late 2024 and increased substantially in the second half of 2025. The nature of the imports is changing rapidly after many years of the picture being constant. It is hard to predict what 2026 and beyond will look like. For Hydro-Quebec, security of supply may not be assured since it is entering competitive and dynamic U.S. markets.

DATA SOURCE: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01; Canada Energy Regulator (https://apps.cer-rec.gc.ca/CommodityStatistics/ViewReport.aspx)

---

U.S. IMPORT PRICES PAID BY HYDRO-QUÉBEC (CANADIAN DOLLARS)

Price data should be used with caution. Prices in Canadian dollars in 2022 reflect the inflationary forces in play after the pandemic of 2020-21. Electricity production in U.S. states began to use more natural gas in electricity production and gas prices began to fall in 2023. The cost of gas plays a significant role in explaining the price of electricity. Water is relatively very cheap and explains why hydroelectricity is relatively so cheap. Electricity prices rise in winter months as household demand increases and gas production and transmission is affected by cold weather.

SPECIFIC PRICE DATA (per kWh, imported power from New York into Quebec):
- First Quarter 2025: 10.25¢
- Second Quarter 2025: 5.04¢
- Year to date (September 2025): 7.15¢

---

SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS

There is a growing dependency in Quebec on imported power, particularly relatively expensive electricity (about 25 times more expensive than CF electricity) from the USA. The changing picture is a remarkable departure from the historic pattern. The future picture is unfolding but it puts Québec in a very difficult position if it continues.

Over the past decade Quebec has entered into agreements with its traditional trading partners and made infrastructure investments assuming its export of green low-cost electricity would continue. Instead, the electricity is flowing into Quebec and not from it.

Churchill Falls, with its super cheap power, has reached its generating capacity and cannot export more power to Quebec. This raises the question: Does Hydro-Québec have a long-term supply problem?

---

ACRONYMS:
CF — Churchill Falls Generating Station
HQ — Hydro-Québec
NL — Newfoundland and Labrador
NB — New Brunswick
MOU — Memorandum of Understanding (December 12, 2024)
CRPP — Churchill River Power Project (video series)