Hydro-Québec’s Production Profiles:
Update, August 2025
Overview
Doug May

Is the Noose Continuing to Tighten on Hydro-Quebec?
• Electricity generation by HQ continues to fall. Down 8.4% July
2025 to July 2024 or over 15% since July 2022.
• Hydraulic turbine power in Quebec, the primary source of
electricity (>90%), is down 10.6% and 18.4% over the same
periods due to drought.
• Quebec must import electricity to meet its own domestic needs.
This need is the greatest in January and February.
• But in the first 8 months of 2025, production was up about 4%
compared with the same period last year. It looks as though
Quebec continues to import beyond its needs in winter (Dec-Feb)
to export power to the USA at high prices.
• To answer the question in the title, we have to examine the entire
year.

• In many recent months, even with the import electricity from Churchill
Falls, electricity supply and demand for Quebec almost meet. There’s
no breathing room.
• Since meeting domestic demand is a necessity. In the short- and
medium-term, Quebec must curtail exports and increase imports.
• Churchill Falls, the main source of imported power in Quebec, has
reached its limits in exporting to HQ. The solution for HQ is turning to its
traditional export markets in the USA for imported power.
• HQ’s imported power from the USA is much more expensive than its
imported power from Churchill Falls (CF)!
• The MOU proposes a price of 1.63¢/kWh for 2025. During the first half of this
year, Quebec imported power from the USA at 7.56¢/kWh. Cheap power from
CF helps HQ to deliver cheap power to its households and industries.

Prices
• HQ has acknowledged that the reason why its electricity to households
is the cheapest in Canada, is its access to very cheap hydro power.
About 15% this power traditionally comes from Churchill Falls. The
current relative importance is publicly unknown, as far as I am aware.
• When imported power from CF provides surplus (beyond Quebec’s
needs) power to Quebec, HQ can export the surplus to the USA.
• This situation occurred in Q1 2025. The average price of electricity HQ obtained
was 16.59¢/kWh. This price is about 10X the power price offered in the MOU.
Note that HQ uses the profits from these export sales to subsidize its domestic
prices, helping keep them amongst the lowest in Canada.
• There is reason to believe that CF power is generally the cheapest
power available to HQ. CF is an older generating station, the Henri
Bourassa (HB), and HB has to pay water royalties to Quebec, which are
far higher than those paid by CF(L)Co to the Government of
Newfoundland and Labrador.

Does the Drought Affect Water’s Value?
• Yes, it does in two ways.
• As water becomes scarcer, like any resource, its value increases.
• As HQ has to increasingly turn to the USA markets for electricity, its costs
keep rising because its US suppliers rely on more expensive natural gas-
fired turbines. This increases the differential rental value of water.
• Since CF depends on water to drive its hydraulic turbines, the value of the
water in the Smallwood Reservoir implicitly increases. It’s likely that the
GNL (Government of Newfoundland and Labrador) does not capture this.
• Quebec does a better job since the water royalty rate is set annually at the
beginning of each year.

Water Reservoirs as
Natural (Green) Storage Batteries.
• The demand for electricity varies throughout the day and over the
year. In the Northeastern US and Canada, demand is the highest
in the winter months. The pricing of electricity in competitive
markets reflects this.
• The Guaranteed Winter Availability Contract (GWAC) of CF(L)Co
acknowledges this. Based on the 2004 contract, the price of CF power
under this contract is 5.6¢/kWh
• The Smallwood Reservoir may be North America’s greatest
storage battery for electricity! Since the explicit and relatively fixed
costs of hydroelectric power, given high seasonal prices in the
winter, it’s best to use the reservoir to generate power then.

Some questions for HQ
• When did HQ realize that they had a serious problem due to climate
change?
• Are the reservoirs in Quebec maintaining their capacity?
• Is HQ or NLH able to predict reservoir capabilities over the next five years?
• If water levels are falling and electricity production is erratic from month
to month but has not increased over the past eight years, what are the
alternative sources in the short term?
• Are the infrastructure projects outlined in the MOU the only longer-term
solution to HQ’s increasing domestic electricity deficit?

The Bottom Line
• In the last two years, Quebec could have just met its own needs by
reducing its exports. The reason for this situation is its very heavy
reliance on hydroelectric power, which has been reduced by drought.
• Quebec must “import” power to meet its needs. The ideal long-term
solution for Quebec is to increase its imports of very cheap, stable,
secure power for as long as possible. Quebec is relying on traditional
sources, namely the Churchill River and CF, to subsidize and support
its lowest electricity prices in Canada. This is a sensible strategy for HQ
and Quebec. Does this process make sense for Newfoundlanders and
Labradorians? That’s the question.
• Note: Statistics Canada has designated power from CF as an export
from NL and an import into Quebec. HQ tends to consider CF electricity
as its own production (not an import) since it owns 34.2% of CF(L)Co,
and CF is viewed as primarily delivering power to Quebec.

Interested in The Evidence?
Follow this link:

Hydro-Québec’s Production Profiles:
Update, August 2025
The Statistical Evidence
Doug May

HQ’s Monthly Domestic Production , January 2022- July
MegawattHoursper month
HQ's Total generation
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01 11

• HQ’s Quebec production in July declined by 8.4% from the same
month a year earlier and over 15% over the past three years.
• Note the seasonal pattern. Hydroelectricity is well-positioned to
meet this pattern, as reservoirs act as giant storage batteries.
Unlike gas turbines, costs do not typically increase as more water
is used from one season to another.
• CF likely has a similar production pattern.

Monthly Production of Electricity by Hydraulic and
Megawatt Hours per month Wind Power Turbines in Quebec,
January 2015-July 2025
QC Hydraulic turbine
QCWind power turbine
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0015-01 13

• HQ’s Hydraulic Turbine Production (HTP) in July decreased by
10.6% compared to the same month last year and has fallen over
18.4% in the past three years.
• HTP consistently accounts for over 90% of total production. In the first
half of 2025, HTP made up about 93% of HQ’s total domestic production.
• Wind power turbine production has not offset the decline in overall
production.
• Hydro power is generally less than other electricity generation methods,
including wind, nuclear, oil, or gas. It is also cleaner than coal, oil, or gas.
• CF and Gull Island power are hydroelectric projects.

Quebec’s Electricity Supply Deficit,
MegawattHoursper month
January 2022- July 2025
Supply Defici
HQ's Total generation
Total electricity available for domestic use
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01 15

• “Domestic availability” is essentially internal demand, since
Quebec must have sufficient power available to meet its own
needs. Households cannot freeze!
• Falling domestic production (internal supply) combined with
slightly increasing internal demand from Quebec’s households
and industries is resulting in an increasing supply deficit (a gap).
• “Mind the Gap!” which is increasing!
• Please note: Possible confusion: StatsCan data has CF as an
import to Quebec. HQ sees CF power not as an import but as
power from a subsidiary.

Importing Electricity to Increase Available Supply,
MegawattHoursper month
January 2022- July 2025
HQ's Total generation Total electricity available
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01 17

• Total Electricity Available equals domestic production plus all
imports, including those from the USA and other provinces,
mainly Churchill Falls.
• Imports into Quebec have increased by 6% between July 2024
and July 2025, mainly from the USA, boosting the available
supply in Quebec.
• See Import video to see that the increased supply is coming from
the USA.

Does Available Supply Meet Domestic Demand,
MegawattHoursper month
January 2022- July 2025 ?
Domestic
Demand is 93.1%
of Total Supply
Total electricity available for domestic use
Total electricity available
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01 19

• In July 2025, domestic demand was 93.1% of available supply.
Three years earlier, this figure was 78.6%. The result is that there is
decreasingly the opportunity to export data.
• One can argue that the data that Quebec has available is greater
than its needs and therefore available for export, has been
primarily due to its imports of electricity from Churchill Falls.
• Note that in many months there is almost no gap! In this case,
Internal Demand = Available Supply!

Thanks for Watching