DOCUMENT TITLE: A New Chapter for Hydroelectric Generation in Labrador - Memorandum of Understanding
SOURCE: Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
DOCUMENT TYPE: Official government presentation summarizing MOU terms
DATE: January 2025
PARTIES: Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Quebec
STATUS: Non-binding MOU setting framework for definitive agreements
TARGET DATE: Completion of final agreements by April 30, 2026
TOTAL PROJECTED VALUE TO NL: $227 billion

---

OVERVIEW

Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Quebec signed an important Memorandum of Understanding for hydroelectric generation in Labrador. This non-binding MOU sets the framework for definitive agreements projected to bring an average of $1 billion a year to the Province between now and 2041, escalating every year after. The proposed partnership will create a significant and immediate increase in value for Newfoundland and Labrador and make a substantial contribution to Quebec's energy security.

---

INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES

NL will honour its existing agreements with Indigenous peoples and seek new agreements as appropriate. Both governments and utilities commit to meaningful engagement with Indigenous peoples as new projects are advanced. Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Quebec will work together to this end.

---

TERMINATE AND REPLACE POWER PURCHASE CONTRACT FOR CHURCHILL FALLS

The new agreement provides an effective price of 5.9 cents per kWh, which is 30 times higher than the current price. It includes mechanisms to escalate price over time, which was missing from the 1969 deal, using various pricing indices to capture changes in market value and pricing fairness over the term. The agreement starts now, effective January 1, 2025 to December 31, 2075, unlocking the value of Churchill Falls 17 years early. This represents a $17 billion increase in value to NL between now and 2041.

HQ payments to CF(L)Co total $33.8 billion in today's dollars or $180 billion in nominal dollars to NL over the term of the agreement. This breaks down to an average of $1 billion a year between now and 2041, an average of $2 billion a year in 2044, and an average of $4 billion a year in 2056 with continued escalation. NL has access to up to 1,630 MW from Churchill Falls by 2061, available for use in-province or resold to HQ for prices reflective of value at the time. New deal pricing is not conditional on new projects proceeding.

CF PPA proceeds in billions: NL Dividends, Water Rental and Royalty at $179 billion; HQ Dividends at $69 billion. The shareholders' agreement is to be modernized and a water management agreement will allow for river optimization.

---

NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN LABRADOR

HQ will pay NL $3.5 billion net present value for the right to co-develop new projects. Combined ownership of all new developments is approximately 65% NL Hydro and 35% HQ. NL Hydro will have access to 1,990 MW (nearly 4 times current allocation) while HQ will have access to 7,200 MW.

GULL ISLAND: 2,250 MW

Environmental Assessment completed in 2012 following extensive and rigorous environmental review. Innu Nation Impacts and Benefits Agreement is in place. The new entity will be owned 60% by NL Hydro and 40% by HQ. Return on equity ranges between 8.0-9.0%, set every 5 years on Government of Canada 10-year bond yields plus 500 basis points. Total cost is $24.9 billion including financing with target commissioning in 2035 under a cost-plus return 50-year PPA with escalating price projected at 2%. There are no automatic renewal rights.

HQ is managing construction and completion and accepting cost overruns which will be included in the PPA. The Lower Churchill Construction Strategy Benefits Agreement as part of the EA release details requirements for jobs and benefits. The hiring protocol requires all workers to be qualified, with priority given first to Innu Nation, then residents of Labrador, then residents of the province, then rest of Canada. Construction for the Gull Island Hydroelectric Development requires 13 million person hours of construction jobs per EA requirements, with other project activities additive.

Contractors, service providers, consultants, and suppliers within the province will be provided with full and fair opportunity to participate on a competitive basis. For reference, Muskrat Falls generated over $3.6 billion in expenditures to NL-based companies. Additional power from new projects will provide electricity for expansion and economic development in Labrador. NL Hydro will operate the facility and has access to 225 MW.

CHURCHILL FALLS EXPANSION: 1,100 MW

Second underground powerhouse near the existing plant using the existing reservoir. Environmental Assessment to be undertaken. Owned by CF(L)Co (65.8% by NL Hydro and 34.2% by HQ). Cost-plus return 50-year PPA with escalating price projected at 2%. Return on equity ranges between 8.0-9.0%, set every 5 years on Government of Canada 10-year bond yields plus 500 basis points. Total cost is $4.6 billion including financing. HQ is managing construction and completion and accepting cost overruns which will be included in the PPA. NL Hydro will operate the facility. No automatic renewal rights. NL Hydro has access to 135 MW combined from upgrades.

CHURCHILL FALLS UPGRADES: 550 MW

CF(L)Co will upgrade existing units at Churchill Falls. Owned by CF(L)Co (65.8% by NL Hydro and 34.2% by HQ). Total cost $1.9 billion including financing. NL Hydro is responsible for construction and completion, with cost overruns to be borne by shareholders of CF(L)Co. Cost-plus PPA escalating at 2% annually. Same term as CF PPA to 2075, with no automatic renewal rights. NL Hydro has access to 135 MW combined with the CF Expansion.

NL TRANSMISSION

NL Hydro will construct transmission in NL to enable the new developments while HQ constructs corresponding transmission within Quebec. The NL portion is 100% owned by NL Hydro within NL at $3.6 billion including financing. NL Hydro will be responsible for construction and completion. Actual costs will be paid by the off-takers at a regulated rate of return on equity.

---

EMPLOYMENT IMPACTS IN NL

The four projects together are expected to generate at least an average annual 3,000 direct jobs during construction and a peak of 5,000 direct jobs. Including indirect and induced employment, the projects are expected to generate at least an average of 5,000 jobs during construction and a peak of 9,500 jobs. These Labrador-based projects will require equipment operators, carpenters, electricians, crane operators, line workers, office workers, accommodations workers, and other diverse skills.

---

OTHER PRINCIPLES

Governing law will use a neutral jurisdiction (Ontario). HQ receives 15 years of exclusivity beginning at the target date to develop Gull Island. For Labrador rates, there will be no rate change arising from this agreement for residential and general service customers, no immediate impact on industrial rates, and government will assess industrial rates policy in the coming years.

---

NEW DEVELOPMENTS PRODUCTION SUMMARY

Gull Island Project: 2,250 MW capacity, 12.0 TWh average energy. CF Expansion Project: 1,100 MW capacity, 0.4 TWh average energy. CF Upgrade Project: 550 MW capacity, 1.0 TWh average energy. Total: 3,900 MW capacity, 13.4 TWh average energy.

---

PRICE COMPARISONS

New York ISO year-to-date: 4.3 cents per kWh. ISO New England year-to-date: 5.3 cents per kWh. New CF PPA: 5.9 cents per kWh. HQ Long-Term Contracts (NECEC and CHPE): 6.5 cents per kWh.

---

FURTHER INFORMATION

Retail electricity rates include the cost of generation (approximately 67%), transmission and distribution (approximately 33%). Approximately 66% of Island domestic electricity rates recover the cost of generation.
