HYDRO-QUÉBEC'S EXPORTS: UPDATE, OCTOBER & NOVEMBER 2025
Summary Findings and Some Questions
Dr. Doug May
January 16, 2026

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Hydro-Québec's export capacity continues to decline significantly, with exports to the USA in October 2025 almost 92% lower than three years earlier. The ongoing drought has severely constrained hydroelectric production, leaving minimal electricity available for export even with increased imports. This analysis examines the tightening constraints on HQ's export business and raises critical questions about data consistency and pricing disparities.

KEY FINDINGS

The Noose Continues to Tighten on HQ

Falling Exports: Even with imports adding to the available electricity, with falling supply, there is little room for exports for many months. During March-June 2025, less than 4% of the total available was exportable, while in March-June 2022, at least 12% was available.

Exports by HQ to the USA in October were almost 92% lower than the same month three years earlier. The decline was spread along its markets in Vermont, New York State and Maine with Vermont being the primary market. HQ's exports spike in the colder winter when demand and prices are high. An opportunity for HQ to make substantial profits during this period exists.

PERCENTAGE CHANGES IN HQ'S EXPORTS

From October 2024 to October 2025:
- Total Exports: +14.8%
- Exports to Other Provinces: +22.2%
- Exports to the USA: -12.5%

From October 2025 to October 2022 (three-year comparison):
- Total Exports: -68.6%
- Exports to Other Provinces: -29.1%
- Exports to the USA: -91.9%

HYDRO-QUÉBEC'S MID-YEAR REPORT (2025)

Strong Performance on Export Markets

Colder winter: Increase in market prices
- Sales of approximately 6 TWh at 16¢/kWh in 2025 (9¢/kWh in 2024)

HQ's mid-year report aligns with Statistics Canada's sales data and Canada Energy Regulator (CER) price data for HQ sales into New York State.

However, NLH price data into the NY market for the same first six months was 8.7 cents/kWh - significantly lower than HQ's 16¢/kWh.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS ABOUT EXPORTS

Why are CER data on exports not consistent with HQ information?

1. CER states that no electricity is exported to NE-ISO. HQ's 2025 semester report says it is our primary customer. Why the difference?

2. Why in the first six months of 2025 was the average sale price for HQ power into NY State 15.81¢/kWh while NLH power was 8.2¢/kWh? Transmission costs?

3. Why are CER's export data for New York state not consistent - i.e., Price x quantity does not equal value - when it is consistent in other cases?

DETAILED ANALYSIS: SUPPORTING EVIDENCE

Talking Note 1: Domestic Needs Consuming Available Supply

Almost all of the electricity available (including Churchill Falls) is increasingly needed to meet domestic needs. This leaves little electricity for export including that needed for long-term commitments to other provinces, principally New Brunswick.

The data show total electricity available for domestic use, total electricity available, and exports from January 2022 to October 2025. The gap between total available and exports has been widening significantly.

Talking Note 2: Declining Export Capacity

Most of the electricity produced in Quebec comes from Hydro-Québec's operations. We can assume that it is Hydro-Québec that does the importing and exporting of electricity.

The data show a general decline in the export of available power by HQ. HQ and Quebec are net importers of electricity and Churchill Falls is a significant (and very inexpensive) source of those imports.

The amount of electricity available for export in October was down by 5.5 percentage points from a year earlier and 14.6 percentage points from that month 3 years earlier.

Total exports as a percentage of total available to HQ have declined from peaks of around 20% in early 2022 to under 10% through most of 2025.

Talking Note 3: Three-Year Export Decline

HQ exports increased in October by almost 15% from the same month a year earlier, but fell by almost 70% over the past three years.

HQ states that its sales data in the first half of this year was 6 TWh (6 million MWh). Statistics Canada data are consistent with this figure.

Talking Note 4: Changing Trade Patterns

Exports to the USA in October were down by 12.5% from the same month in 2024 and 91.9% from three years earlier.

Exports to other provinces were up 22.2% year-over-year in October but fell just over 29% over the past three years.

Note the growing relative importance of trade within Canada. Export commitments to New Brunswick dominate commitments to U.S. states.

Note also that suggestions in the MOU to base Churchill River's electricity prices on specific markets might acknowledge changing trade patterns.

The data visualization shows Quebec's exports to the USA and to other provinces from January 2022 to October 2025. Exports to the USA (red line) have fallen dramatically from peaks of 2.5 million MWh to under 500,000 MWh. Exports to other provinces (green line) have remained more stable but also declined from peaks of 1.6 million MWh.

Talking Note 5: U.S. Market Distribution

According to the Canada Energy Regulator data, Vermont seems to be the dominant export market for HQ with NY State not far behind. Exports to Maine from HQ seem sporadic.

CER data report no significant sales from Quebec into New England-ISO. However, HQ Quarterly reports often refer to New England-ISO and the prices it receives there. It is not clear HQ's reason for doing this.

NLH seems to be taking over the NE market according to CER and increasing its exports into NY.

Monthly exports of electricity from HQ to U.S. States from January 2022 to November 2025 show Vermont as the primary destination, followed by New York, with Maine receiving sporadic shipments.

Talking Note 6: Comparative Export Trends - Quebec vs. Newfoundland and Labrador

The amount of electricity that Quebec exports to the USA has been much larger than Newfoundland and Labrador has.

Once electricity is in the grid it is likely impossible to say where it was generated.

The decrease by Hydro-Quebec in its electricity sales to the USA over the last four years is remarkable. Keep in mind that while most people might believe that Quebec is a net exporter of electricity to the USA, it is a net importer.

Also keep in mind that HQ has invested vast amounts of money over the past couple of years constructing and upgrading transmission lines into the USA. It promotes hydroelectricity as green energy.

Monthly electricity exports by Quebec and NL to the USA from January 2022 to November 2025 show HQ exports declining from peaks of nearly 3 million MWh to under 500,000 MWh, while NL exports have remained relatively stable.

Talking Note 7: New England Market Dynamics

While there is not a pattern here, it is interesting that it is NL and not Quebec that ships electricity into New England. Quebec had entered into agreements with NE-ISO to export cheap green hydroelectric power into states such as Massachusetts. To do this it built new transmission lines through Maine, which were very controversial due to environmental concerns.

In early 2026, a kWh of electricity is about 33¢ US or 45.5¢ Canadian. This price is about 3 times the current price to households in St. John's.

Monthly quantity flows of electricity by NL into New England and New York State show NL maintaining exports to both markets, with New York being the larger destination.

Talking Note 8: Price Data Inconsistencies

The pattern of export prices into selective US markets using Canada Energy Regulator Data seems to be increasingly inconsistent and unreliable.

How can trade prices be negative? Why are there extremely high prices in one market and not in others? Why does price x quantity not equal value when dealing with exports from NL but not from Quebec?

Repeated email requests and phone calls to CER in Calgary have been met with silence or a non-response. Reliable price data are necessary to determining the potential value of Churchill River electricity and water rents.

These data problems must be resolved before any adjustment price process for electricity outlined in subsequent negotiations can be implemented.

If there is a seasonal price pattern, export prices are the highest in the coldest months and then increase somewhat in July and August.

Since electricity production and exports follow seasonal patterns, then prices should not be set annually but seasonally, which is what Hydro-Québec does in its export markets and is moving towards in its domestic markets.

Electricity export prices into US markets from Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador show extreme volatility, with some prices exceeding 300 Canadian dollars per MWh and others showing negative values, raising serious questions about data reliability.

Talking Note 9: HQ's Seasonal Price Strategy

The higher export price in the winter of 2025 is probably due to colder temperatures when increased demand competes with supply constraints.

The price pattern for 2025 seems to be consistent with CER's report for NL exports to New England.

It is not clear why Hydro-Québec reports sales to New England when CER reports that it does not export there. Another puzzle to be solved.

From HQ's Semi-Annual 2025 Report:

"The company increased electricity exports to take advantage of high prices in a context marked by strong demand."

"On markets outside Québec, weather conditions experienced during the first few months of the year caused energy prices to increase overall."

The New England Market chart shows monthly averages for hourly electricity prices. In 2025 (dark blue line), prices peaked at approximately 18¢/kWh in January-February, then dropped sharply to around 5-6¢/kWh from March through June. The 2020-2024 average (light blue line) shows a more moderate pattern, peaking at around 8¢/kWh in January.

HQ'S MID-YEAR STATEMENT, 2025

Strong performance on export markets

Colder winter: Increase in market prices
- Sales of approximately 6 TWh at 16¢/kWh in 2025 (9¢/kWh in 2024)

Increase in income as a result of an efficient marketing strategy, supported by the reliability and performance of its generation and transmission equipment.

THE BOTTOM LINE

HQ has a reputation as an energy powerhouse able to provide clean energy and meet the needs of markets in the USA.

HQ's exports continue to fall due primarily to declining hydroelectric production resulting from the continuing drought.

Exporting electricity is profitable at any time but particularly in the winter months when prices are high. A key component of this process is using hydro reservoirs as storage batteries.

Any "profit" is used by HQ to reduce electricity prices to its domestic customers. Quebec follows profit-maximizing principles in operating outside Quebec.

The key to making all this strategy work is very cheap and abundant power from Churchill Falls. It's a necessity for HQ. It's natural and rational that Hydro Quebec can best meet its supply shortfalls by increasing production at Churchill Falls and Gull Island.

ADDITIONAL DATA: NEW YORK STATE TRADE

Percentage Changes in HQ's Imports and Exports (MWh) With New York State Year-to-Date (November)

From YTD 2024 to YTD 2025:
- Exports to NY: -37.0%
- Imports from NY: +75.0%

From YTD 2022 to YTD 2025:
- Exports to NY: -89.6%
- Imports from NY: +691.5%

Storyline: Exports are falling and imports are rising.

HQ's mid-year statement for 2025 aligns with Statistics Canada's sales data and CER price data for HQ sales into NY. NLH price data into the NY market for the same first six months was 8.7 cents/kWh.

Percentage Changes in Prices of HQ's Imports From New York State for YTD (November) 2025

From YTD 2024 to YTD 2025:
- Imports from NY: +84.6%

From YTD 2022 to YTD 2025:
- Imports from NY: -47.2%

Note: Cost of importing electricity into Quebec from USA has risen. Wonky data for 2022 suggests the need to clean up the data and double-check the sources.

SUMMARY

This declining generation has led HQ to curtail exports to the USA and increase its power imports from New York State. HQ is currently a net importer with the USA. This is a significant change in historical patterns.

Prices of imports from and exports to the USA are generally rising. This increases the relative attractiveness of Churchill Falls power with its very low, relatively fixed cost.

Note: Check the data sources on prices. Export volumes from CER and Statistics Canada are consistent but electricity price data from Statistics Canada are not available.

DATA SOURCES
- Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0016-01
- Statistics Canada, Table 25-10-0015-01
- Canada Energy Regulator: https://apps.cer-rec.gc.ca/CommodityStatistics/ViewReport.aspx
- Hydro-Québec Semi-Annual Report 2025

DOCUMENT METADATA
Author: Dr. Doug May
Date: January 16, 2026
Series: Churchill River Power Project Analysis
Focus: Hydro-Québec export trends and market dynamics
Key Topics: Electricity exports, market pricing, trade patterns, Churchill Falls dependency