The Newfoundland
and Labrador Gazette
Extraordinary
PART II
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ST. JOHN’S, MONDAY, DECEMBER 15, 2025


NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR
REGULATION

NLR 110/25


NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR
REGULATION 110/25


Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understanding for a New
Long-Term Energy Purchase and Development Initiative Between
Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order
under the
Public Inquiries Act, 2006
(O.C. 2025-360)

(Filed December 15, 2025)

Under the authority of section 16 of the Public Inquiries Act,
2006, the Lieutenant-Governor in Council makes the following Order.

Dated at St. John’s, December 15, 2025.


Karen Stone KC
Clerk of the Executive Council

ORDER

Analysis

1.    Short title                           5.   Conduct of inquiry
2.    Definitions                           6.   Powers
3.    Inquiry established                   7.   Minister responsible
4.    Terms of reference                    8.   Final report


Extraordinary Gazette                            3                       December 15, 2025

Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understandin            110/25
for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order

Short title               1. This Order may be cited as the Inquiry Respecting the
Memorandum of Understanding for a New Long-Term Energy
Purchase and Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order.

Definitions               2. In this Order

(a) "Act" means the Public Inquiries Act, 2006;

(b) "inquiry committee" means the persons appointed under
section 3 to conduct the inquiry;

(c) "minister" means the Minister of Energy and Mines; and

(d) "Memorandum of Understanding" means the Memorandum
of Understanding referred to in subsection 3(1).

Inquiry established       3. (1) There is established an inquiry respecting the Memorandum
of Understanding for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro
and Hydro-Québec signed by Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro,
Hydro-Québec, and Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited.

(2) The following individuals are appointed to conduct the
inquiry:

(a) Chris Huskilson, as chairperson;

(b) Dr. Guy Holburn; and

(c) Michael Wilson.

Terms of reference        4. (1) The inquiry committee shall

(a) obtain, review and analyze all relevant information and
documentation, including the full text of the Memorandum
of Understanding, related studies, draft term sheets and
correspondence; and

(b) determine whether the Memorandum of Understanding is in
the best long-term interest of the people of the province.


Extraordinary Gazette                               4                   December 15, 2025

Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understandin                 110/25
for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order

(2) In conducting the inquiry, the inquiry committee is
encouraged to consider the following:

(a) whether the negotiators representing Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and the government of the province were
given an appropriate mandate before beginning the
negotiations with Hydro-Québec that resulted in the
Memorandum of Understanding, and whether any such
mandate was consistent with the final report of the
Commission of Inquiry Respecting the Muskrat Falls
Project, advice from the 2041 Churchill River Management
Expert Panel and any other reports the inquiry committee
considers relevant;

(b) whether claims made about revenue the Memorandum of
Understanding would generate, and the resultant forecasted
benefits to the provincial treasury, were accurate and
reasonable, including a review of how the total value of
$33.8 billion (on a net present value basis) in Schedule F of
the Memorandum of Understanding, total forecasted
payments to be made to Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Corporation Limited by Hydro-Québec and how the annual
schedule of forecasted payment amounts in Schedule G of
the Memorandum of Understanding were determined and
why;

(c) whether the sufficiency of water rentals or royalties, or both,
were or should have been considered;

(d) whether claims about how many full-time jobs would be
created for the residents of the province were based upon
reasonable current cost estimates and how this number
compares to the estimated total number of jobs that would be
created in the province;

(e) whether alternative markets for power were considered,
including pursuing opportunities with entities other than
Hydro-Québec, concerning both existing and potential
hydropower assets on the Churchill River;

(f) whether the economic opportunities and social benefits
related to the proposed development projects for Churchill


Extraordinary Gazette                            5                    December 15, 2025

Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understandin                110/25
for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order

Falls and Gull Island were considered independently and
whether more benefits could be achieved by developing
them separately;

(g) whether there are any barriers to maximizing export
opportunities;

(h) whether the proposed governance structures and agreements,
ownership, equity participation and control mechanisms of
hydropower assets on the Churchill River and Gull Island
and related transmission projects ensure the province has
control and is clearly the principal beneficiary of the energy
resources of the Churchill River;

(i) whether the pricing structures for both Churchill Falls
(Labrador) Corporation Limited and the Gull Island Joint
Venture power and the allocation of energy and capacity are
consistent with the province being the principal beneficiary
of the energy resources of the Churchill River;

(j) whether the balance between capacity and energy production
was properly considered to ensure a reliable and cost-
effective energy system for the benefit of the people of the
province;

(k) whether appropriate consideration was given to how changes
to the Churchill River water management agreement will
impact Muskrat Falls operations and whether the
compensation for any such impact is fair and reasonable;

(l) whether the proposed contract duration specified for each of
the new Churchill Falls Power Purchase Agreements, the
Churchill Falls Expansion Power Purchase Agreements and
the Gull Island Power Purchase Agreements, and the
duration of the Exclusivity Agreement, are in the best long-
term interest of the people of the province, and in the
alternative, what contract duration would be appropriate
given current energy market dynamics;

(m) whether sufficient contingency was included in the cost
estimates for the new developments and transmission assets
to reflect increasing costs of labour and materials;


Extraordinary Gazette                           6                    December 15, 2025

Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understandin               110/25
for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order

(n) whether the proposed commercial terms and pricing
mechanisms provide adequate compensation to the province,
as principal beneficiary, and limit its exposure to acceptable
levels of construction and financial risk; and

(o) whether the financial, economic and social value to the
province ensures current and future generations will be the
principal beneficiaries of the Churchill River resource.

(3) In addition to the matters the inquiry committee is
encouraged to consider under subsection (2), the inquiry committee
may review, analyze and comment on any matter related to the
Memorandum of Understanding it considers necessary to determine
whether the Memorandum of Understanding is in the best long-term
interest of the people of the province.

Conduct of inquiry        5. (1) The following mechanisms may be used in the conduct of
the inquiry:

(a) interviews and surveys;

(b) research studies;

(c) inspections and investigations; and

(d) submissions.

(2) The inquiry committee may commission any assistance it
determine necessary including technical, financial, legal and energy
market assistance.

Powers                  6. For the purpose of conducting the inquiry, the inquiry
committee

(a) may receive evidence;

(b) shall have the powers of a commission under section 9 of the
Act to compel the production of testimony and evidence;

(c) shall have the powers of a commission under section 10 of
the Act to conduct inspections, and subsection 10(2) of the
Act shall apply; and


Extraordinary Gazette                              7                    December 15, 2025

Inquiry Respecting the Memorandum of Understandin                  110/25
for a New Long-Term Energy Purchase and
Development Initiative Between Newfoundland and
Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec Order

(d) shall have the powers of a commission under section 11 of
the Act to apply for a warrant to search, and subsection
11(2) of the Act shall apply.

Minister responsible       7. The minister shall be the minister responsible for the inquiry.

Final report               8. (1) The inquiry committee shall deliver a final report to the
minister and the Premier on or before April 30, 2026.

(2) The final report shall include

(a) an executive summary;

(b) an outline of the inquiry process; and

(c) conclusions of the inquiry committee.

(3) The minister shall release the final report to the public.

(4) The final report shall not

(a) contain privileged, commercially sensitive or any other
information that may interfere with the current or future
negotiating position of, or result in financial loss or harm to
the province, Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and their
subsidiaries or Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation
Limited; or

(b) express any conclusions or recommendations regarding the
civil or criminal responsibility of any person or organization.


©King's Printer


Extraordinary Gazette                                 8                     December 15, 2025

ST. JOHN’S, MONDAY, DECEMBER 15, 2025


Extraordinary Gazette Index

Title of Act and
Subordinate Legislation CNLR or           NL Gazette
made thereunder         NL Reg. Amendment Date & Page No.

Public Inquiries Act, 2006

Inquiry Respecting the                 NLR 110/25   New          Dec. 15/25   p. 3
Memorandum of Understanding
for a New Long-Term Energy
Purchase and Development
Initiative Between Newfoundland
and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-
Québec Order


9
