Creating Long-Term Value from
the Churchill River for the People
of Newfoundland and Labrador


Report by the Churchill River   Chris Huskilson (Chair)
Independent Review Committee      Dr. Guy Holburn
Michael Wilson


April 30, 2026

Contents
1.     Executive Summary............................................................................................................................. 2
2.     The 2024 Memorandum of Understanding................................................................................... 6
3.     Evaluation of the Memorandum of Understanding.................................................................... 10
3.1       Churchill Falls Power Purchase Agreement....................................................................... 10
3.2       The Churchill Falls Development Projects......................................................................... 16
3.3       The Gull Island Joint Venture (GIJV).................................................................................... 20
3.4       NL Hydro Transmission........................................................................................................... 25
4.     Governance of Negotiations............................................................................................................ 26
5.     Economic Growth Benefits of Churchill River Power................................................................ 29
6.     Conclusions......................................................................................................................................... 38
7.     Recommendations............................................................................................................................. 42
8.     IRC Responses to the Order’s Suggested Considerations........................................................44
Appendix 1 – Order Establishing the Inquiry....................................................................................... 62
Appendix 2 – Biographies of IRC Members.......................................................................................... 70
Appendix 3 – Brief History of Churchill Falls....................................................................................... 72
Appendix 4 – Discount Rate..................................................................................................................... 79
Appendix 5 – Levelized Cost of Electricity........................................................................................... 82
Appendix 6 – Estimated Rate Mitigation Costs................................................................................... 85
Glossary of Terms....................................................................................................................................... 86


Statement on the use of artificial intelligence: The content of this report was written by the
Independent Review Committee (IRC) members and staff. AI tools were used only for the
purpose of grammatical editing. The final report was prepared and edited by the IRC and staff.

Statement on Redactions: Redactions have been applied to safeguard third‑party commercially
sensitive and confidential information, as well as privileged cabinet records of a former
administration, in order to preserve the integrity of future negotiations.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                                                                       1

1.     Executive Summary

This report assesses whether the December 12, 2024, Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
among Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro (NLH), Hydro-Québec (HQ), and Churchill Falls
(Labrador) Corporation (CFLCo) regarding future commercial arrangements for hydro-electric
power generation on the Churchill River is in the best long-term interest of the people of
Newfoundland and Labrador (the “public interest”).

The Churchill Falls (CF) generating plant and the Churchill River in Labrador are among the
most valuable infrastructure and natural assets in Canada. CF, with a capacity of 5,428
megawatts (MW) that generates 34 terawatt hours (TWh) of energy each year, is one of the
largest single sources of low cost, low carbon, dispatchable, renewable power in Canada and
the United States. The facility is jointly owned by NLH and HQ, the two shareholders of CFLCo.
CF has been in continuous operation for almost 55 years, is debt free, and will continue to
produce reliable power for the foreseeable future. In late 2041, when its renewed 1969 power
purchase agreement (PPA) with HQ expires, and absent any new agreement, its energy will no
longer be under contract, opening significant new opportunities for CFLCo and the province.

The MOU is a non-binding agreement that proposes to replace the existing 1969 Churchill
Falls PPAs with new, 51-year PPAs. In addition, it outlines four projects (referred to as “the
development projects”): the upgrade of and an expansion to the existing CF plant; developing a
new 2,250 MW power generating plant at Gull Island (GI) that would sell power primarily to HQ
under a 50-year PPA; and building new transmission lines in Newfoundland and Labrador and
Québec.

The Independent Review Committee (IRC) finds that the MOU has important financial and
economic benefits for the province in the period up until 2041, when the current Churchill
Falls PPA expires. Beyond 2041, however, a significant limitation is that NLH’s restricted access
to incremental CF power up to 2075 is likely to constrain long-run growth in energy-intensive
industries such as mining and to hinder broader economic development. Other significant
concerns about the MOU include problematic pricing and payment models, lack of NLH
transmission access for CF power to export markets, the challenge of sustaining joint ventures
between partners with divergent interests, and other commercial arrangements with associated
risks. The IRC concludes that, despite the benefits, the MOU in its current form is not in the
public interest. However, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador (GNL) could make
significant decisions, discussed in the IRC’s recommendations, that may ultimately allow NLH to
work toward a revised agreement with HQ to serve the public interest.

The total financial benefits to the provincial treasury from the MOU over the 2025 to 2085
period are estimated to be $36 billion in present value (PV in 2024 dollars, excluding estimated
rate mitigation costs of $5.4 billion PV). Out of the $36 billion, $9.2 billion (PV) will be received


2                                            Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

before 2042 (HQ’s payments to CFLCo will result in $7.3 billion, NLH’s $1.8 billion).1 Therefore,
$7.3 billion (PV) is the short-term financial benefit at risk to the province if the HQ CF PPA
contemplated in the MOU is not implemented. Table 1 lists a summary of the financial benefits
to the province of the major elements of the MOU. Appendix 4 contains a discussion of the
discount rate used to produce the NPVs of the financial benefits.


Table 1 – Summary of Financial Benefits to the Provincial Treasury from the MOU


2025–2041 NPV      2042–2075 NPV      TOTAL NPV
Financial Benefits from MOU                               ($ million         ($ million      ($ million
2024 dollars)      2024 dollars)   2024 dollars)


Dividends, rents and royalties from:
HQ flowing through CFLCo                        $7,347           $15,693        $23,040
NLH flowing through CFLCo                         1,818             5,236          7,054
NLH expired blocks flowing through CFLCo                                0             1,173          1,173
Total flow-through benefits from CFLCo                           9,165            22,102         31,267

CF Upgrade                         0                 0                0
CF Expansion                         0                68               68
Total CF/CFU/CFX                       9,165            22,170          31,335


Less estimated rate mitigation                       (515)           (4,860)          (5,375)
Net Benefits to Treasury from CF/CFU/CFX                            8,650            17,310          25,960


Gull Island Joint Venture (2025–2085)                           394              3,731          4,125
NL Transmission                       128                692             820
NPV of Benefits from MOU                          9,172             21,733         30,905

Source: IRC analysis, NLH


The majority of the MOU’s financial benefits are attributable to the proposed new CF PPAs,
which have a PV to the provincial treasury of approximately $31.2 billion over 51 years before
estimated rate mitigation costs (see Appendix 6).


1     Differences in totals are due to rounding of numbers.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                      3

Prior to 2042, the proposed CF block price model is largely anchored on HQ’s regulated, low
electricity rates, and after 2041 on HQ’s avoided replacement costs with only a small weight
derived from external energy market prices. In the view of the IRC, the block price model has
implementation risks because of its particularly complex structure. And due to significant back-
loading of annual payments, financial benefits to the province are delayed, exposing GNL to
inflation risk. The IRC concludes that a simpler price model could be more durable and easier to
administer while still meeting the objective of fair value over time and bringing forward revenue
payments to CFLCo.

The financial benefit to the provincial treasury of GI and the CF Upgrades and CF Expansion
projects is much smaller ($4.1 billion NPV) and, as the primary customer for GI power,
HQ is the main beneficiary of these projects over 50 years. The PPAs for GI and the new
developments are atypical of the electricity sector, featuring misaligned PPA and amortization
terms and forced escalation of revenues, which lower the financial rate of return and create
financial risks for shareholders. The IRC concludes these features are not in the public interest.
The IRC also finds that alternative ownership, operating, and right-of-use models for Gull Island
should be carefully evaluated to ensure that the province is the long-term beneficiary of the
power produced by this asset.

The MOU’s predicted economic benefits to the province, which arise from the growth of
energy-intensive industries as a result of gaining access to greater supply volumes from
Churchill Falls, are forecast to be substantial – but also limited. Over the 51-year term of the
new CF PPA, mining and industrial sector expansion in Labrador West could contribute $178
billion (in 2025 dollars) to the provincial gross domestic product (GDP) from the direct and
spinoff economic stimuli. Approximately $48 billion (in 2025 dollars) of this GDP benefit is
forecast to occur from 2025 to 2041, during which NLH gains access to up to an extra 605
MW of existing CF capacity and 360 MW of new development projects capacity. In addition,
the GDP impact associated with construction of Gull Island, the CF Expansion and Upgrades
projects, and NLH’s new transmission line is estimated to be approximately $15 billion (in 2025
dollars).

A drawback of the MOU, however, is that NLH’s access to existing and additional capacity from
Churchill Falls and Gull Island in the period 2042 to 2075 is only 500 MW – equivalent to a
growth rate less than 1% per annum – which is likely to constrain expansion of energy-intensive
industries. Hence, although the MOU brings new financial value to the province (achieved
from exporting CF power to Québec), there is at the same time a significant lost opportunity
of potential economic benefits that would accrue from retaining more power in the province.
In an alternative scenario, if the industrial sector were able to grow at a modestly higher rate
after 2041 than forecast – dependent on NLH having greater access to Churchill River power –
the total direct and spinoff GDP contribution is estimated to be potentially 65% greater ($115
billion, 2025 dollars) than the economic benefit forecast under the MOU over the 2025 to
2075 period. Achieving economic growth benefits, however, is more complex and uncertain,

4                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

and requires more time than realizing financial value from exporting power. A key decision for
GNL is thus defining the optimal balance between the financial versus the economic value that
it wishes to achieve from the Churchill River. Table 2 summarizes the GDP and employment
benefits estimated by the IRC and the GNL Department of Finance.


Table 2 – Estimated Economic Impact of Iron Ore Mining Projects Enabled by the MOU (GDP
Millions, 2025 Dollars, and Employment, Person-Years)


Source: IRC analysis, GNL Department of Finance


The report also includes responses to the 15 points of consideration posed in the IRC’s terms of
reference. The report concludes with the IRC’s recommendations for GNL as it considers how
the people of Newfoundland and Labrador and future generations should benefit from the full
potential of the Churchill River:

1. GNL should determine, based on a comprehensive analysis of long-run economic
development options, the extent to which power generation from the Churchill River
should provide financial versus economic value to the province over time.

2. GNL should sanction and support NLH construction of new transmission line capacity
between Churchill Falls and Labrador West in order to enable economic growth of the
province’s energy-intensive industries.

3. GNL and NLH should remain committed to the objective of building respectful
relationships with and consulting Indigenous communities in connection with future
developments on the Churchill River and in Labrador.

4. GNL should rigorously evaluate alternative ownership, operating, and right-of-use
models for new hydroelectric generation at Gull Island that are consistent with the
province being the principal beneficiary of the financial and economic value created.

5. GNL and NLH should prepare for future negotiations with HQ by preparing a fully
articulated negotiation strategy and best-practice governance process.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       5

2.     The 2024 Memorandum of Understanding

Background
In May 2022, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador formed the Churchill River
Management Expert Panel (“the 2041 Panel”), responding to a key recommendation from the
2020 Report of the Commission of Inquiry Respecting the Muskrat Falls Project:


In preparation for 2041, government should appoint an expert panel with
a mandate to determine the best approach to be taken by the Province in
its attempt to ensure maximum long-term benefits from the Churchill Falls
generating station and other potential generation sites on the Churchill
River. This panel should be properly funded, non-political and include
experts who are best able to assist government in preparing for the
negotiations with Québec (Volume 1, p. 62).


The 2041 Panel’s mandate was to develop and recommend approaches that would secure
long-term benefits from the Churchill Falls facility, with particular focus on preparing the
government’s position for 2041, when the 1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract with Hydro-
Québec expires. The Panel was charged with building a thorough understanding of the existing
contract and providing strategic advice on the future management of the Churchill River. The
government recognized that meaningful preparation had to begin well in advance of expiry so
that the full range of options could be comprehensively evaluated.

In the course of its work, the 2041 Panel examined three major, non-mutually exclusive
avenues for maximizing the value of the assets: expand in-province sales to support
electrification and the growth of new and existing industries; increase sales into external export
markets; and restructure the sales arrangement with Hydro-Québec. In 2023, the 2041 Panel
concluded its review and delivered its strategic advice to GNL, providing the foundation for
moving toward negotiations over the post-2041 future of the Churchill River. The 2041 Panel’s
findings and recommendations to government have remained confidential, but the IRC found
their work to be of good quality.

Soon after the 2041 Panel completed its report, the government appointed a three-person
negotiating team to build on the Panel’s recommendations and to prepare for negotiations with
Hydro-Québec. The team consisted of Karl Smith (Chair), a former senior executive at Fortis;
Jennifer Williams, CEO of Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro; and Denis Mahoney, K.C.,
Deputy Minister of Justice and Public Safety.


6                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

In April 2023, the government and the board of directors of NLH approved a principles-based
mandate for the negotiating team to engage with Hydro-Québec in order to replace the
existing 1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract with a new agreement that would maximize the
long-term value of the Churchill Falls facility for the province. In June 2024, the government
and NLH board approved a second mandate that authorized the team to negotiate over the
development of Gull Island, a core priority for Hydro-Québec.

Overview
On December 12, 2024, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador publicly announced
a “new energy partnership” among the provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador and Québec
and the Innu Nation. Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro (NLH), Hydro-Québec (HQ), and
Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited (CFLCo), a corporation owned by NLH (65.8%)
and HQ (34.2%), had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that set out key
principles for replacing the existing 1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract (as renewed in 2016)
and for developing new hydroelectric infrastructure assets, including a new hydroelectric
facility at Gull Island on the Churchill River, expansion and upgrades of the existing Churchill
Falls facility, and new transmission lines.

The MOU is a framework agreement: it leaves many terms and conditions to be negotiated in
a series of future Definitive Agreements, which will become legally binding when signed. The
MOU itself is not legally binding, except in regard to certain terms covering confidentiality
obligations and the work product resulting from development studies.

The MOU proposes two significant changes for the Churchill Falls plant and for CFLCo.

First, it will terminate the existing 1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract between HQ and
CFLCo (which is due to continue until 2041) and replace it with a new 51-year power purchase
agreement in which Churchill Falls power pricing is not fixed but variable, based on a basket of
external energy cost and market price indices. The MOU specifies that the target value of HQ’s
payments for power to CFLCo over the entire term of the new PPA will have a net present
value (in 2024 dollars) of $33.8 billion. The MOU also includes the series of annual payments
by HQ in nominal dollars which, when discounted at the agreed discount rate of 5.822% (see
Appendix 4), will equal the $33.8 billion amount. Annual volume allocations of CF output to
NLH and HQ are specified: NLH will have access to up to 1,630 MW (approximately 30%) of
existing CF capacity by 2075, while HQ will have access to 3,660 MW by 2075. Under the
existing contract, NLH has access to 525 MW. There is no automatic renewal right for the PPA.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         7

Second, the MOU envisions improvement and expansion of the current Churchill Falls plant in
two projects:

1. CF Upgrades project (CFU): An upgrade of the turbine generators to increase capacity by
approximately 550 MW

2. CF Expansion project (CFX): The development of a new powerhouse next to the existing
facility to increase the installed capacity by approximately 1,100 MW

NLH will have access to 135 MW of this power. The power produced by the two projects will
be sold under 50- or 51-year power purchase agreements. The MOU states that PPAs should
deliver a 2% escalation of revenues per annum and that project assets should be depreciated
over 51 years (CFU) and 65 years (CFX). Any cost over-runs for the CF Upgrades project will be
borne by the shareholders of CFLCo on a proportional (pro-rata) basis. Cost over-runs for the
CF Expansion project will be borne by the off-takers (primarily HQ) under the cost-plus power
purchase agreement.

The other major element of the MOU is an agreement to form a new joint venture corporation
between NLH and HQ, owning 60% and 40% of shares, respectively, to develop, operate
and own a Gull Island plant that will have a power generation capacity of 2,250 MW. HQ will
pay NLH a development fee of $3.5 billion (in 2024 dollars), of which $1.3 billion will be paid
unconditionally. The balance ($2.2 billion) will be paid to NLH conditionally, subject to achieving
certain milestones relating to the Gull Island project and the CF Expansion project. HQ will
purchase 90% of Gull Island power output, with NLH having access to up to 10% of its output.
NLH will have access to 360 MW of total capacity from the Gull Island and the CF Upgrades
and Expansion projects. Under the MOU, HQ will have responsibility for project construction
and will provide a completion guarantee if required. Any cost over-runs will ultimately be borne
by the off-takers of the GI PPAs. Power will be sold under a 50-year PPA with the same cost-
plus pricing conditions as the CF Upgrades and CF Expansion PPAs.

When completed, these development projects will bring the combined capacity of the Churchill
Falls and the Gull Island facilities to approximately 9,328 MW, of which 9,190 MW will be
delivered to the off-takers, with a minimum of 7,200 MW for HQ and a maximum of 1,990
MW for NLH. Additionally, NLH and HQ will each construct respective segments of a new
transmission line in NL and QC that will connect the Gull Island plant to Québec’s transmission
system. Transmission costs will be recovered through cost-plus pricing charged to off-takers.

The parties to the MOU confirmed a commitment to the objective of building respectful
relationships with and consulting Indigenous communities in connection to the projects. The
IRC received submissions from several Indigenous groups and affirms the importance of the
parties respectfully engaging and consulting with Indigenous groups.


8                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The parties to the MOU also agree to amend and restate the existing Water Management
Agreement, to optimize water management on the entire Churchill River, and to modernize the
governance arrangements for CFLCo.

The MOU can be read in full online at https://www.OurChapter.ca/.

The Churchill River Independent Review Committee Inquiry Process
On December 15, 2025, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador established an
official inquiry into the 2024 Memorandum of Understanding and appointed the Churchill River
Independent Review Committee (IRC), consisting of three independent panel members (Chris
Huskilson, Chairperson, Dr. Guy Holburn and Michael Wilson). Appendix 1 contains the Order
in Council outlining the IRC’s terms of reference. Appendix 2 provides the committee members’
biographies.

The core mandate of the IRC was to determine whether the 2024 Memorandum of
Understanding is in the best long-term interest of the people of the province. The IRC was
tasked with delivering a final report to government by April 30, 2026. In conducting its
work, the IRC gathered written information and evidence from NLH, NLH’s expert advisors,
and government (employees and elected officials). It also interviewed a wide range of
stakeholders, and it invited public submissions through the IRC’s website portal. More than 350
submissions were provided by individuals, elected officials, Indigenous groups, and industrial
representatives. In all, the IRC received and evaluated thousands of pages of documents. To
assist in its work, the IRC retained external legal counsel, a full-time analyst, an editor, and
administrative support.

This next section of the report presents the IRC’s evaluation of the MOU’s proposals for the
new Churchill Falls PPA and each of the proposed development projects.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     9

3.     Evaluation of the Memorandum of Understanding

The MOU is the outcome of negotiations between NLH and HQ that fundamentally seek to
create and capture value—financial, economic, social and environmental—from the hydroelectric
power generation potential of the Churchill River. This section assesses the benefits and risks
associated with each of the five major elements in the MOU: the Churchill Falls power purchase
agreement, the Churchill Falls Upgrades, the Churchill Falls Expansion, Gull Island, and NL
transmission assets. It also reviews the associated corporate governance arrangements, which
are central to how organizations operate, invest, and create long-term value.


3.1 Churchill Falls Power Purchase Agreement
In the MOU, CFLCo, HQ, and NLH have agreed to terminate all existing PPAs and replace them
with new long-term PPAs in respect of volumes of power from the existing CF plant, each with
a term of 51 years (2025 to 2075). Appendix 3 discusses the existing PPAs and the history of
Churchill Falls.

Financial Value
Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and Hydro-Québec negotiated a target present value for
HQ’s payments to CFLCo in a new CF PPA that extends to 2075 (the “contract term”). The
target value amount is based on agreed annual energy volumes and an agreed schedule of
target nominal payments. The total target present value agreed in the negotiations is $33.8
billion (2024 dollars).

Based on NLH’s 65.8% ownership interest in CFLCo, the Newfoundland and Labrador
provincial treasury is forecast to receive approximately $23 billion (PV) in flow-through benefits
from HQ’s payments to CFLCo. Of that $23 billion, approximately $7.3 billion is to be received
during the 2025 to 2041 period and equates to a forecast levelized cost of energy of
3.8 ¢/kWh. This amount may be interpreted as NLH’s share of the total residual value for
HQ of the existing PPA (in which the price HQ pays for power is significantly lower) over the
remaining 17 years of its term (2025 to 2041). The remaining $15.7 billion (paid from 2042 to
2075) equates to a forecast levelized cost of energy of 16.7 ¢/kWh, which is considered to be
similar to HQ’s estimated replacement cost for power with similar attributes to CF.

In addition, the GNL treasury is forecast to receive financial benefits from NLH of
approximately $8.2 billion (PV), prior to rate mitigation costs, that result from the new CF NLH
PPA. Thus, the combined forecast total financial benefits to the GNL treasury related to new
CF PPA arrangements is approximately $31.2 billion (PV). This forecast does not include the
cost of rate mitigation (estimated by the IRC to be approximately $5.4 billion in PV) or any


10                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

negative impact the payments may have on the province’s entitlement to federal equalization
payments.

While these proposed Churchill Falls PPA arrangements bring significant new financial benefits
to the province, they also raise a number of concerns, including the pricing and payment
framework for the power, Newfoundland and Labrador’s access to Churchill Falls energy, and
the governance of CFLCo.

Pricing of Churchill Falls Power
The MOU sets out a unique, flexible block-pricing framework for Churchill Falls power. Rather
than stipulating a fixed price (as did the 1969 contract), prices are intended to adjust over time
in accordance with a basket of external energy cost and price indices, the largest block of which
has a proposed adjustment for Consumer Price Index inflation to protect real values over the
term of the new PPAs.

In the opinion of the IRC, there are several limitations with the pricing model that should be
addressed in any future negotiations:

1. Block-pricing model design
The proposed block-pricing mechanism places significant weight on
both Hydro-Québec’s regulated electricity rates and Hydro-Québec’s
replacement energy cost, with minimal weight on broader energy market
prices. This arrangement increases the importance of including robust
protections in the pricing terms to buffer against potential structural
distortions of Québec-based pricing. The proposed structure limits the
extent to which pricing for Churchill Falls power captures evolving drivers
of market value (as an example, Hydro-Québec recently proposed a new
electricity rate for data centres, which is approximately double the rate for
large industrial customers). As a result, and particularly after 2041, prices
for CF power will be more tightly linked to HQ’s avoided replacement cost
than to broader market value.

2. Timing of payments
The annual nominal payment schedule (Schedule G in the MOU) reflects
highly variable and steeply increasing nominal prices for CF power over
time. GNL-published prices on the OurChapter.ca website indicate prices
for power rising from 1.6 ¢/kWh in 2025 to 37.2 ¢/kWh in 2075. This
profile creates two related challenges:

• Back-weighting of the payment schedule (i.e., specifying higher nominal
payments later in the PPA) delays financial benefits and exposes
the province to future inflation risks. It also exposes the province to


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       11

operational risks associated with an aging plant in the later years of the
PPA’s term.

• If PPA prices materially exceed market prices in later years, they may
discourage industrial consumption and economic development and/
or result in significant rate mitigation costs that must be borne by
taxpayers.

3. Complexity and implementation
Implementing the Schedule F principles-based block-pricing model will be
particularly complex and will require detailed specification and negotiation.
Implementing the pricing model will further be complicated by attempting
to adhere to the Schedule G annual nominal payment amounts. While
the MOU stipulates the agreed target present value of HQ’s payments
- $33.8 billion - it does not discuss potential future variability in that
amount that may arise from future realization of the energy cost and price
indices, which creates the risk that future payments could be higher or
lower than $33.8 billion. The degree of price risk each party is willing to
tolerate remains to be negotiated and it contributes to further complexity
in the final PPA structure. The MOU also does not specify the pricing for
recaptured power and the expiring blocks, which remain to be negotiated.

4. Transmission access
In principle, full market value for Churchill Falls power could be realized if
CFLCo were able to wheel power through Hydro-Québec’s transmission
system to external markets. Such access was not negotiated as part of
the MOU. In addition, if NLH does not use recaptured power within this
province, HQ is able to purchase unused volumes on terms to be agreed
upon at a later date. This situation restricts NLH’s ability to both contract
directly with external customers and capture export pricing.

Due to the overall complexity and uniqueness of the block-pricing approach, there is an
increased risk that the final terms will contain unforeseen gaps and that disputes will occur
during the PPA term. In the opinion of the IRC, a simpler pricing model may be more durable
and easier to administer while still meeting the objective of fair value over time. In addition, the
IRC considers the profile of HQ’s Schedule G nominal payment amounts is not reasonable and
creates financial risks for GNL.

Economic Benefits of Churchill Falls Power
Churchill Falls power is among the lowest cost, reliable, emissions-free, dispatchable electricity
resources in Canada and therefore has strong potential to catalyze private investment in
energy-intensive sectors.

12                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

A key benefit of the MOU is that it increases NLH’s allocation of power from the existing
Churchill Falls facility by up to 605 MW before 2041, more than doubling the current amount
it accesses (525 MW). This represents an average increase for NLH in existing CF capacity of
4.9% per year over the 2025 to 2041 period. The IRC understands that this additional 605 MW
would be fully utilized before 2041 and that it could support significant economic development,
including expansion of the mining sector in Labrador, which is an important contributor to
provincial GDP, taxes and royalties, and employment. In addition, the MOU provides NLH with
access to 360 MW from the new development projects from 2035 to 2075.

The economic benefits to the province in terms of GDP and jobs from enhanced industrial
growth in Labrador, enabled by access to additional CF power, are estimated to be substantial:
as the report section on Economic Growth Benefits describes in more detail, provincial GDP
could increase by a total of $48 billion (present value) over the 2025 to 2041 period and
by $130 billion (present value) over the 2042 to 2075 period as a result of expansion of the
Labrador mining sector, which is currently unable to grow due to power constraints.

However, the IRC has several concerns related to the long-term adequacy and certainty of
NLH’s access to power from Churchill Falls:

1. Allocation of CF capacity after 2041
The proposed increase in NLH’s access to power from CF and the new
development projects after 2041 is only 500 MW (two 250 MW expiring
blocks, which become available in 2051 and 2061). This is equivalent to an
average growth rate in NLH volumes of 0.9% per year from 2042 to 2075.2
Relative to the pre-2042 period (when NLH’s access grows more than six
times faster), this could constrain further development of energy-intensive
industries in Labrador and limit their contribution to the provincial economy.
In addition, under the proposed schedule E in the MOU, no new CF power
becomes available to NLH over the 15-year period from 2035 through 2050.
This long gap may create a binding constraint on private investment during
that period, particularly for projects that require firm power commitments
and have long development lead times. There is thus a lost opportunity for
greater economic development in the province, which the IRC estimates
could be significant (see section on Economic Growth Benefits).

2. Allocation risk
NLH’s access to additional CF power could be materially reduced below
the 1,105 MW otherwise allocated by the MOU, if Gull Island and the CF
Expansion projects are not completed (per Schedule I, except for reasons


2   This is calculated as the compound annual growth rate over the 33-year period from 2042 to 2075. NLH will have access
to up to 1,490 MW of capacity in 2042 from the existing CF facility and new development projects, and up to 1,990
MW in 2075.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                            13

specified in Schedule J). In that scenario, NLH will gain access to only an
additional 300 MW of CF power between 2031 and 2075—a reduction
of more than 70% relative to the full 1,105 MW of additional existing
CF power posited in Schedule E. Given the potential negative economic
consequences for the province of this outcome, the IRC considers that
the downward adjustment provision of Schedule I is an unacceptable risk
allocation for NLH.

3. Long-term provincial economic development plan
While the MOU proposes that NLH will have access to a maximum of 30%
of the power output of the existing Churchill Falls facility by 2061, the IRC
could not find evidence of a comprehensive economic analysis establishing
whether that amount is an optimal long-term share for maximizing
provincial economic development. Determining what is an appropriate
long-term amount of power supply requires a provincial long-term plan
and strategy that balances Churchill Falls’ financial value (from export
revenues) with its economic value (enabling industrial development, jobs,
and enhanced GDP).

4. Contract duration
The term of the proposed new Churchill Falls PPA (51 years) effectively
extends the current PPA by about 34 years, until 2075. Within the
electricity sector, however, it is not uncommon for PPAs to be shorter than
25 years (unless driven by financing needs). Given the difficulty of making
accurate long-term demand forecasts—particularly in light of uncertainties
around AI and data centres, electrification pathways, geopolitics/national
security policy, and emerging energy technologies—the IRC finds that a
shorter contract term for the CF PPAs than contemplated in the MOU
would offer meaningful advantages to NLH and the province.

Governance of CFLCo
CFLCo’s governance is currently defined by a Shareholders’ Agreement that remains in effect
until 2041. Under this arrangement, NLH is the majority shareholder (65.8%) and appoints six of
eight directors to the board of CFLCo. HQ (the minority shareholder, owning 34.2%) appoints
the remaining two directors. Despite NLH’s board majority, HQ retains significant decision
control through “special majority” approval requirements for certain major matters (in which
approval is required from at least one NLH director and one HQ director). The major decisions
include items such as capital upgrades, budgets, debt financing, and dividend policy. As a result,
HQ can effectively control material strategic or financial decisions at the board of CFLCo.


14                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Such effective veto rights can be problematic when a shareholder has a conflict of interest—
particularly where that shareholder is also a major customer of the corporation. In CFLCo’s
case, HQ is both a significant minority shareholder and the dominant purchaser of Churchill
Falls power under the PPA framework; this creates an inherent risk that governance decisions
could be influenced by off-taker interests.

The IRC also notes that HQ can exert significant operational influence related to its control
over water flows on the Churchill River, which can affect optimization of the hydroelectric
facility at Muskrat Falls. This interdependency heightens the importance of clear governance,
transparency, and conflict-of-interest safeguards being included in any future agreements for
CFLCo.

After 2041 and the expiry of the Shareholders’ Agreement, HQ’s special majority decision
rights will be eliminated (absent any agreement otherwise), and NLH will be able to appoint
all CFLCo board directors. It will then have greater control over the strategic direction and
functioning of CFLCo than it currently does. HQ will remain a shareholder and its rights will
be protected under the provisions of By-Law 28 and the Canada Business Corporations
Act, which prohibits directors from discriminating for or against the interests of specific
shareholders in their corporate decision-making. Briefly, By-Law 28 is an agreement for future
governance arrangements for CFLCo that will come into effect in 2041 upon termination of the
Shareholders’ Agreement and was agreed to by NLH and HQ as an outcome of negotiations in
1999. A summary of By-Law 28 is provided in Appendix 3 of this report. After 2041, as long as
HQ remains the owner of more than 25% of the shares of CFLCo, certain important corporate
decisions will continue to require its approval.

The IRC concludes that the governance arrangements for CFLCo that will apply after 2041, as
specified in By-Law 28, provide the appropriate balance of majority and minority shareholder
control and the appropriate protection of all shareholder rights.

Summary
Overall, the proposed new CF PPA offers substantial financial benefits to the provincial
treasury over the 51-year term, estimated at $26 billion (2024 dollars) after rate mitigation
costs. The near-term increase in NLH’s access to Churchill Falls power is likely to catalyze
energy-intensive industrial development, bringing new economic wealth and jobs to the
province. However, there are important qualifications and risks: the block-pricing model, while
unique and flexible, has significant implementation risk and is limited by the deferred payment
schedule and by its anchor on regulated rates and replacement costs in Québec rather than on
broader energy market prices. In addition, the minimal growth in CF volume allocation for NLH
after 2041 and the extended period with no new additional allocation, represent constraints on
long-term economic growth and development. The potential downward adjustment of NLH’s
CF power allocation is an additional risk to achieving economic benefits from Churchill Falls.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                      15

3.2 The Churchill Falls Development Projects
Two distinct development projects are proposed for Churchill Falls – an upgrade of the existing
facility and an expansion to it. The CF Upgrades project (CFU) can be characterized as both
maintenance and the replacing and upgrading of turbine generators. For an estimated cost of
$1.9 billion, it will replace the existing 11 turbine generator units, which is expected to increase
the plant’s capacity by 550 MW. The upgraded units will come into production from 2028
through 2038 and will produce an incremental 0.94 TWh per year by 2038. The new turbines
are expected to deliver 10% more power, use 7% more water flow, and improve the efficiency
of the plant.

The second project, the CF Expansion (CFX), adds two more turbine generator units in a
separate powerhouse adjacent to the current facility, giving the plant a total of 13 generators.
The $4.6 billion CFX project expands the existing Churchill Falls power generating facility and
is expected to increase the installed capacity of the Churchill Falls complex by approximately
1,100 MW, producing an additional 0.35 TWh of energy per year.

Subject to additional technical and environmental studies to be carried out by NLH, HQ,
and CFLCo, as well as to input provided by relevant key interested parties and governmental
authorities, it is currently anticipated that the CF Expansion project will involve the following:

•   an underground powerhouse containing two turbine generators of approximately 550
MW each, to be located around 250 metres to the west of the existing Churchill Falls
powerhouse. These units will be fed by two individual penstocks using the water in the
existing Smallwood Reservoir on the East Forebay. Turbined water will return to the
Churchill River through a surge chamber (located downstream of the powerhouse) and a
tailrace tunnel

•   a breach in an existing dyke to create the approach channel, and construction of a new
dyke

•   a workers’ camp and other temporary or permanent infrastructure in Labrador

The combined new capacity of the Churchill Falls plant will be 7,078 MW, producing 35.8 TWh
of energy per year, making CF the largest hydroelectric plant in Canada.

While the CFU project is an upgrade and life extension project, which is beneficial for the
plant’s owners and off-takers, the CFX project is primarily a capacity addition project that
will produce little incremental energy and, as such, is more beneficial to HQ. NLH will have
access to 135 MW of power from the CF developments at an equivalent capacity factor
to that produced by Gull Island, expected to be approximately 0.72 TWh per year. This is
approximately 8% of the capacity of these projects.


16                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Financial Value
Based on HQ’s and NLH’s PPA payments to CFLCo, the GNL provincial treasury is forecast to
receive $68 million from CFX and $0 from CFU (PVs) over the PPA periods. These benefits are
small because of the funding structure: substantially all of the revenue is dedicated to repaying
debt and debt servicing costs rather than providing dividends to shareholders.

CFU produces $0 financial benefit because it was agreed in the MOU that the PPA for this
project would be based on cost recovery only. CFX has a small financial benefit because it was
agreed in the MOU that it, too, may be financed with 100% debt but also provide a return on
deemed equity of 25% of the capital investment. The parties subsequently agreed that the
deemed equity return would be the spread between the debt cost and the 8% to 9% return on
deemed equity. The financial return is negligible in relation to the total cost of $6.5 billion for
the two CF development projects.

While the CF development projects provide additional capacity and marginal energy additions
to the Churchill Falls facility, they also raise a number of concerns related to pricing, access to
power, financing, capacity and energy, technical risk, and amortization risk.

Power Pricing
The MOU includes separate PPAs for the CFU and CFX projects. It states that these PPAs
are required to include cost-of-service (‘cost-plus’) pricing terms projected to deliver a 2% per
annum escalation of revenues over the term. GNL required this feature to be included during
the latter stages of MOU negotiations. Expert advisors expressed concerns to NLH and in
written comments to the IRC about this revenue model:

The 2% price escalation clause in the cost-of-service models (‘Escalating
Cost-of-service’) for new developments is a construct that is similar to
regulated utility / rate base models (‘Traditional Cost-of-service’) with a
forced upward escalation curve while maintaining a direct cost passthrough
of costs to the off-taker.

Relative to the Traditional Cost-of-service model, the Escalating Cost-of-
service model requires that equity and / or debt distributions are back-
dated [deferred] in order to maintain 2% price escalation. Subject to the
definitive agreements, the Escalating Cost-of-service model could provide
higher nominal equity dividends given time-weighting of back-ended
[deferred] payments, which requires larger dividends to achieve the same
IRR / ROE as Traditional Cost-of-service model.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                          17

Given that nominal equity dividends are back-ended [deferred] payments,
this may lead to lost opportunity cost of re-investment of those dividends
relative to the Traditional Cost-of-service model which has front-loaded
equity dividends with a declining energy price. The 2% price escalation
clause in Escalating Cost-of-service model has a direct consequence on
the financing as the cash flow generated in the early years of operations
may produce debt service coverage ratios [(DSCR)] that could be below
minimum DSCR required by lenders to provide debt financing. This could
be solved with cash-funded reserve accounts to cover initial period DSCR
shortfalls, but it is important to keep these shortfalls limited to the first
1-2 years. There may also be an impact on financing pricing and market
appetite.

For CFX there is a mismatch between the 50-year contract and the 65-
year agreed amortization that along with the 2% escalating price will leave
substantial residual unpaid cost at the end of the contract.

For the CF Expansion project, there is a mismatch between the 50-year PPA term and the 65-
year agreed amortization period. This will leave substantial residual unrecovered costs at the
end of the PPA term. Due to the forced 2% escalating revenue requirement, CFX will have a
cash flow deficiency and unpaid debt, dividends, and equity at the end of the PPA term, which
will burden CFLCo. Consequent results, on the one hand, are an escalating revenue and price,
and on the other a lower financial return and financing challenges—as well as a higher cost of
financing because revenues are deferred. Receiving revenue later in the PPA term increases the
risk to NLH, the majority owner of CFLCo.

NLH Power Allocations
Under Schedule E in the MOU, NLH will be allocated access to an additional 1,105 MW of
existing Churchill Falls capacity by 2061. However, Schedule I (“Downward Adjustments to
Volume Allocations”) provides for a set of possible reductions to NLH’s power allocations
from Churchill Falls if the CFX and/or Gull Island projects are not built or commissioned. A
series of mitigating circumstances to these reductions are provided in Schedule J (“Exemptions
to Downward Adjustments to Volume Allocations”). If CFX and Gull Island are not built or
commissioned, NLH’s additional volumes could potentially be reduced to 300 MW, a reduction
that would be detrimental to the growth of the industrial sector in Labrador West and have a
negative effect on the NL economy.

Financing
NLH and HQ agreed that the Churchill Falls Developments will be financed primarily using
CFLCo debt. As stated above in the quote from the expert advisors, financing these projects


18                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

when they feature the forced 2% escalating revenue model will be more difficult and costly
than if a traditional utility cost-of-service revenue model is used.

The debt associated with financing these projects, if financed on the CF balance sheet, will
reduce CFLCo’s capacity to pay additional dividends when the Churchill Falls PPA renewal
contracts are established. In addition, based on information received from NLH’s expert
advisors, the 2% escalating cost-of-service pricing will leave a debt and deemed equity residual
value in CFLCo at the end of 50 years of $5.6 billion (nominal, $0.2 billion NPV) for CFX.

In the opinion of the IRC, a traditional utility cost-of-service revenue model would be more
appropriate for the Churchill Falls development projects as it would reduce financing risk and
costs, a benefit to the shareholders.

Capacity vs Energy
The CF development projects add a total of 1,650 MW of new capacity but produce only a
total of 1.29 TWh of energy per year, which is a capacity factor of just under 9%—whereas
the capacity factor of the CF plant is approximately 70%, which meets the energy needs for
industrial customers in Labrador. These investments are therefore primarily useful to Hydro-
Québec, but they put a burden on CFLCo’s financial structure.

Technical Risk
Comprehensive technical and environmental studies are required before the parties can decide
to sanction these projects. CFX will see a new powerhouse being constructed within 250
metres of the existing plant, which may create risk for the existing plant. As well, the expansion
adds challenges to managing water on the river and must be carefully planned. These decisions
should remain under the control of NLH, as majority owner of the CF plant and 100% owner
of the downriver Muskrat Falls plant, to ensure that these facilities are fully protected from
possible negative consequences.

Summary
The CFU and CFX projects are essentially enhancements to the facility at Churchill Falls.
CFU sustains the existing CF facility and extends its operating lifespan; by contrast, CFX is a
relatively complex, technically challenging and low financial value addition to the plant. In the
opinion of the IRC, these projects add considerable complexity to the MOU. These projects
primarily benefit Hydro-Québec by improving reliability and power supply at a relatively low
cost of capacity (compared to the cost of Gull Island), while creating financial risk for CFLCo, of
which NLH is the majority shareholder. They could instead be negotiated separately from the
MOU as a matter of CFLCo’s long-term business asset and capital planning.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                        19

3.3 The Gull Island Joint Venture (GIJV)
Gull Island is one of the best undeveloped hydro-electric power generation opportunities on
the continent. Similar to Churchill Falls, it would be a legacy development for the people of NL
and provide future prosperity for the province.

Construction and operation of the Gull Island power generating facility, downstream from
Churchill Falls and upriver from Muskrat Falls, is expected to provide an installed capacity of
approximately 2,250 MW and produce approximately 12 TWh of energy per year.

Subject to additional technical and environmental studies and to input from relevant
stakeholders, it is currently anticipated that the Gull Island Project will involve:

•   a powerhouse containing at least five turbine generator units

•   a new dam

•   a reservoir, expected to be around 230 kilometres long

•   a workers’ camp and other temporary or permanent infrastructure in Labrador

Hydro-Québec is an experienced designer and builder of large-scale hydroelectric facilities,
which should facilitate a successful project. Under the MOU, NLH has access to 10% of Gull
Island power and energy. This amounts to 225 MW of power at GI’s final capacity factor.

Financial Value
Based on NLH’s 60% ownership of Gull Island and on PPA revenue payments that will be made
by both HQ and NLH to the GIJV, the GNL provincial treasury is forecast to receive $4.1 billion
(NPV) in financial benefits from the Gull Island corporation in the years leading to 2085.

As with the CF development projects, GNL required that the revenue model for the GI PPAs
deliver a projected 2% escalation in revenues each year. GNL also required that the PPA
term be 50 years, which was not aligned with the agreed 65-year amortization period. These
requirements will create the same challenges as those outlined above in the CF Developments
section, magnified by Gull Island’s much larger cost and long construction period. As a result
of the 2% price escalation clause, the revenue collected over the 50-year contract will have
a value of $15.8 billion (PV). At the end of the 50-year PPA, due to both the 2% revenue
escalation and misaligned 65-year amortization and PPA periods, there will be a debt, dividend,
and equity residual obligation of the Gull Island Joint Venture of $30.8 billion (nominal) or $1.0
billion (PV, 2024 dollars).

Evidence presented to the IRC by NLH’s expert advisors indicated that for the first 45 years of
the PPA period, the off-takers (minimum 90% HQ) will not pay the true full cost of Gull Island


20                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

power, creating a revenue shortfall that results in unpaid debt, dividends and equity at the
end of the PPA. At the end of the PPA, there will be an accumulated balance of $20.9 billion
(nominal) of unpaid dividends to the shareholders, of which NLH will be owed $12.5 billion
and HQ will be owed $8.4 billion. NLH has indicated that future energy market prices may not
support the subsequent Gull Island PPA (after 2085) with pricing at the level needed to repay
outstanding debts and unpaid accumulated dividends to the shareholders. A risk is that when
the GIJV needs to negotiate the post-2085 PPA in the future, unless it has transmission access
to external markets, GIJV may have the similar, weak bargaining position as CFLCo had with the
initial 1969 CF PPA (when CFLCo was burdened with debt and financial obligations).

Gull Island is a valuable opportunity for the province, and the MOU sets the stage for realizing
its development. But the proposed commercial arrangements for its financing, ownership
structure, and development fee, plus the possibility of transmission congestion, raise a number
of significant concerns.

Construction Cost and Financing
It is currently expected that the Gull Island project will cost between $15 and $25 billion to
build, although a P85 estimate has not yet been completed. Construction of Gull Island will be
led by HQ which has considerable experience in large-scale hydroelectric construction projects.
HQ will bear the majority of the risk of cost over-runs as the primary off-taker under the Gull
Island PPA, though NLH bears some of this risk as the minority off-taker. There is additional risk
to the shareholders of the GIJV because approximately 23% of construction costs and any cost
over-runs (on a nominal basis) will need to be recovered by a subsequent PPA after 2085, when
NLH may be purchasing a larger percentage of GI capacity.

The parties have agreed to finance the project on a 25% equity/75% debt basis. The debt
associated with project financing is intended to be secured by the asset itself and by the
contracts with the off-takers—primarily HQ. As the comments from the expert advisors quoted
above reveal, using the 2% escalating cost-of-service model will make financing Gull Island
more difficult and more costly than if a traditional utility cost-of-service revenue model was
used. The combination of the misaligned amortization and PPA periods and the proposed
pricing model leaves unpaid debt, dividend, and equity balances at the end of the 50-year PPA
contract.

In the opinion of the IRC, if a cost-based revenue model is used for Gull Island, a traditional
utility cost-of-service approach would be more beneficial to the shareholders and off-takers
because it would lower financing costs, risks, and cost of energy. In addition, if NLH wished
to access more power in the future from Gull Island, a traditional utility cost-of-service model
would lead to significantly lower prices for NLH at that time.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         21

NLH Power Allocations
Under Schedule E in the MOU, NLH will be allocated access to an additional 1,105 MW of
existing Churchill Falls capacity by 2061. However, Schedule I (“Downward Adjustments to
Volume Allocations”) provides for a set of possible reductions to NLH’s power allocations
from Churchill Falls if the CFX and/or Gull Island projects are not built or commissioned. A
series of mitigating circumstances to these reductions are provided in Schedule J (“Exemptions
to Downward Adjustments to Volume Allocations”). If CFX and Gull Island are not built or
commissioned, NLH’s additional volumes could potentially be reduced to 300 MW, a reduction
that would be detrimental to the growth of the industrial sector in Labrador West and have a
negative effect on the NL economy.

Development and Exclusivity Fee
Hydro-Québec will pay NLH a development fee of $3.5 billion for the right to develop Gull
Island. The amount of the fee represents a share of the value that HQ gains by accessing
Gull Island power rather than building or purchasing alternative sources of energy with
similar attributes, which are estimated to be more costly on a per unit-basis than Gull Island
power. In accordance with the MOU, NLH has committed to use all or part of the $3.5 billion
development fee as its portion of the equity investment in the Gull Island Joint Venture. The
agreement provides that NLH’s 60% equity contribution to the Gull Island Joint Venture will be
capped at $3.5 billion without any further dilution.

The cost saving to HQ from developing Gull Island rather than developing other, more costly
projects is influenced in part by two factors: the pricing mechanism for the power and the
construction cost of the project. Changing from a 2% escalating revenue cost-of-service
model to a traditional cost-of-service model would reduce the levelized cost of energy from
Gull Island, which would increase the cost saving. Second, refining the P85 estimate of the
construction cost would narrow the range of forecast costs, thereby also updating the potential
cost saving of Gull Island relative to alternatives.

Based on evidence the IRC reviewed about HQ’s alternative costs of energy supply should Gull
Island not be developed, the IRC finds that the development fee of $3.5 billion is a low share
for NLH of the total cost savings that HQ would gain from accessing Gull Island power. In the
opinion of the IRC, the 15-year exclusivity period for HQ to develop GI is long compared to
common industry practice, especially as it does not begin until 2029. A shorter period would be
more appropriate.

Ownership Structure
The MOU calls for the creation of a new 60/40 joint venture corporation between NLH and
HQ to develop, operate, and own Gull Island.


22                                        Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Establishing a joint venture corporation for Gull Island is a major, long-term, and likely
permanent decision that has important risks. Joint venture corporations are often challenging
to sustain in the long run: owners’ interests tend to diverge over time as their circumstances
change, even if they were aligned initially. Conflicts between joint venture corporation
shareholders are especially likely to arise when there is an inherent conflict of interest, as when
a shareholder is also a major customer of the corporation. In a power generation corporation,
for instance, a shareholder-customer may prefer to allocate capital toward “gold-plated” asset
maintenance in order to ensure maximum operational reliability, while other shareholders (who
are not major customers) may prefer financial returns on their equity investment in the form
of dividends. Also, a minority shareholder may have different risk tolerances for facility design,
construction and financing parameters than a majority shareholder.

Under the proposed governance structure for the GI joint venture corporation, HQ will retain
its ownership stake, until it chooses otherwise, in one of the province’s most valuable but as
yet undeveloped assets. However, in other jurisdictions, alternative development, operating,
ownership and right-of-use models have been successfully used, such as Public-Private
Partnerships (P3) or Participation Agreements. Briefly, in a P3 model, NLH would contract with
a subsidiary of HQ to build and operate the Gull Island project, and full ownership rights would
ultimately transfer back to NLH at the end of the contract term. Alternatively, in a participation
agreement, each shareholder is entitled to a share of electricity directly proportional to its
ownership stake (so NLH would retain 60% of the energy, or 1,350 MW, from Gull Island) that
it can use or sell at any price without requiring approval from the other shareholder. Each of
these alternatives has advantages and disadvantages and the preferred approach will depend
on the parties’ objectives.

The IRC finds that alternative development and ownership models for Gull Island were
not sufficiently considered before MOU negotiations commenced, and that alternative
arrangements, such as a participation agreement, could potentially produce more desirable
outcomes consistent with the province’s long-term objectives.

Transmission
NLH and HQ are each responsible for building their respective segments of the transmission
line that will connect Gull Island to HQ’s transmission system. The MOU states the
requirements as follows:

The Parties agree that NLH will lead and be responsible for the concurrent
development of the NL Transmission Assets as required to transport
electricity generated by the Development Projects to an agreed HQ
delivery point by no later than the commercial operations date of each
Development Project. The NL Transmission Assets will be wholly- owned
by NLH. NLH and HQ agree to enter into agreements with respect to the


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       23

usage and payment for the NL Transmission Assets (the “NL Transmission
Agreements”) at a regulated cost-of-service, the terms of which shall be
negotiated in the Definitive Agreements.

The Parties agree that HQ will lead and be responsible for the concurrent
development of the QC Transmission Assets as required to transport
electricity generated by the Development Projects beyond the agreed HQ
delivery point by no later than the commercial operations date of each
Development Project. The QC Transmission Assets will be wholly owned
by HQ.

NLH is planning to be able to deliver at least 8,930 MW to the HQ delivery point based on
the maximum energy allotment, before the date at which the development projects are in
commercial operation.3 However, the MOU does not specify how far or to what extent HQ
should enhance its transmission infrastructure to accommodate increased power “beyond
the agreed HQ delivery point”. If HQ does not make the full necessary enhancements
throughout its transmission system, there is a risk that NLH’s ability to transmit power from
CF (including CFU and CFX) and Gull Island, including NLH’s existing 265 MW transmission
reservation, to external markets could be limited. This uncertainty would be reduced by a
specific HQ commitment to ensure transmission capacity throughout its system is sufficient to
accommodate the full capacity of CF and the new development projects’ power.

Summary
Gull Island has the potential to create significant long-term benefits for the province of
Newfoundland and Labrador. However, the proposed structure for its development and
operation raises a number of issues that, in the IRC’s opinion, should be addressed. The
escalating revenue model makes it less likely that NLH would choose to use Gull Island
power in the later years of the PPA due to the high power prices at that time, which could
impede industrial growth in the province. Revenue shortfalls below true costs may limit the
corporation’s ability to meet its full financial obligations during the term of the PPA. The
mismatch between the PPA and amortization periods creates financial risk for the shareholders
when the first PPA ends. The development fee is at the low end of value-sharing with NLH.
The additional power generated in Labrador may congest transmission through Québec and
prevent CF power from reaching external markets beyond Québec. Finally, the joint venture
ownership structure continues some of the challenges of CFLCo governance, creating strategic
and operational risks. Resolving these issues will help ensure that Gull Island achieves its full
potential and serves the public interest.


3    8,930 MW represents 4,765 MW (HQ’s allocation from CF in 2025) + 550 MW (CFU) + 1,100 MW (CFX) + 2,250 MW (GI)
+ 265 MW (NLH transmission reservation).


24                                                  Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

3.4 NL Hydro Transmission
The MOU stipulates that NLH will lead and be responsible for construction and delivery
of the transmission lines within NL that are required to transport electricity generated by
the development projects through Labrador to an agreed HQ delivery point, and to do so
no later than the commercial operation dates of Gull Island and CFX. NLH will wholly own
the NL transmission assets. Users of the NL transmission lines will pay a fee based on a
regulated utility cost-of-service model, the terms of which will be negotiated in the Definitive
Agreements. HQ is also required to develop the transmission assets within Québec to connect
Gull Island to the delivery point.

Total revenue over the 50-year period from the NL transmission lines are estimated to have a
present value of $2.2 billion (2024 dollars) or $13.1 billion (nominal). The net present value of
the financial benefit to the provincial treasury from the NL transmission lines are estimated to
be $820 million (2024 dollars), of which $128 million accrues in the years before 2042.

As part of a 2022 NLH and Hydro-Québec collaboration, NLH prepared a planning-level cost
estimate for the Labrador transmission lines to support strategic assessment of transmission
options needed in conjunction with new power generation. The estimate reflects a conceptual
understanding of routing, facilities, and system configuration and was not intended to establish
a sanction-ready project budget. Terminal station costs were benchmarked against recently
constructed facilities of similar scope and function. The resulting high-level estimate, including
allowance for cost escalation since 2022 and financing costs, is $3.6 billion (nominal).

Cost estimates for NL transmission assets have not been jointly agreed to by NLH and Hydro-
Québec. While changes to the estimates are possible in either direction, a material downward
revision is considered unlikely by NLH (absent a significant change in market conditions or
project scope).

The potential financial risks to be borne by NLH (or GNL) for this project are associated with
the upfront capital requirement: NLH must fully fund all development and construction costs
for the NL transmission lines until usage revenues begin to flow. At that point, debt costs will
be recovered from users through a regulated cost-of-service pricing model. Should NLH’s total
equity requirements for all the MOU projects exceed the $3.5 billion development fee payment
from Hydro-Québec, NLH would need to source additional equity funding to fund construction
of the transmission lines. Depending on the source of that funding, there may be impacts on
NLH’s and/or GNL’s credit profile.

NLH has proposed that all costs, including any cost over-runs, will be recovered from the
users of the NL transmission lines. It is expected that NLH will have to provide a completion
guarantee, which will represent a direct contingent liability to NLH (and indirectly GNL, if NLH
requires support).


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                      25

4.    Governance of Negotiations

GNL initially sought to establish a balance between government and NLH board oversight over
the MOU negotiation process, under which the board would first approve some key decisions,
and then the government would review and approve them. Some key decisions were eventually
subject to government approval but did not require board approval. In practice, as negotiations
progressed, the government assumed a greater degree of control over the negotiation team and
negotiation decisions than did the NLH board.

In the IRC’s opinion, the NLH board did not exercise appropriate oversight authority over
the MOU negotiations. In April 2023, the board reviewed and approved a broad principles-
based mandate for the negotiating team to commence negotiations over the Churchill Falls
PPA, subject to subsequent GNL approval.


In June 2024, the board
approved a second broad principles-based mandate for negotiations over Gull Island. However,
it did not develop or approve detailed, tangible commercial and policy negotiation targets
or parameters against which to evaluate the team’s progress on either mandate, or to guide
them in trade-offs (for example, weighing financial benefit against securing power volumes to
support domestic economic development).

Although the board met regularly with the CEO of NLH, who was a member of the negotiating
team, it did not meet with the whole negotiating team in order to gain the perspectives of
the other two team members. The board also did not meet with the negotiating team’s expert
advisors, either along with the team or independently. Nor did the board establish a formal sub-
committee with a mandate to oversee negotiations until after the MOU was signed (although
it did set up an informal advisory committee in 2023). After the two negotiating mandates had
been approved, the board had a limited role in formally approving key negotiation decisions
until the MOU was completed, which the board approved in December 2024.

The NLH board received updates from senior management on the progress of negotiations
during regular board meetings. However, it did not retain its own expert advisors, independent
of management, to monitor and advise the board on negotiation outcomes. Doing so would
have strengthened the ability of the board to challenge and debate management’s reports and
recommendations and to evaluate the progress of a highly complex set of negotiations. Partly
as a consequence, the negotiating team deviated from some of the recommendations of the
2041 Panel report.


26                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

In contrast, as negotiations between NLH and HQ progressed, the government assumed an
increasing level of oversight and control over the negotiating team and over key negotiation
decisions. Like the NLH board, the government approved the two principles-based mandates,
and it received briefings from members of the negotiating team and NLH executives. In the
absence of specific negotiation targets, the government actively directed the negotiating team
on certain topics and required that the team obtain government approval on key negotiation
decisions. However, the IRC could not confirm whether the government retained external
experts from the energy or utilities sectors to provide independent advice on the negotiated
outcomes or on the impact of proposed directions to the negotiating team (although the
government did retain a law firm to monitor the progress of negotiations).

To illustrate, the government required that benefits to the province be increased by $17 billion
by 2041 arising from HQ’s payments to CFLCo. However, the IRC did not find evidence that the
government fully assessed the potential financial and economic consequences and impact on
negotiations of such a requirement.

Second, the government required 50- or 51-year terms for the new development projects’
PPAs. This prerequisite created financing challenges since the agreed asset amortization
periods were 65 years, leading to unpaid debt and equity balances at the end of the PPA
– creating risks for the shareholders and GNL. The negotiating team and expert advisors
recommended against mis-aligned amortization and PPA terms.

Third, in the latter stages of negotiations, after the Churchill Falls part of the deal had largely
been completed, the government required that revenues for the new development projects
escalate by 2% per annum. This requirement departs from established utility pricing models. To
achieve a fixed 2% annual increase, prices for Gull Island power had to be artificially reduced
below true costs for 45 years, which resulted in more costly financing and deferred repayments
to debt and equity holders. Both the negotiating team and its expert advisors advised the
government not to require a 2% price escalation.

The IRC did not find evidence that the full financial and economic implications of these
government requirements for commercial parameters of the MOU were comprehensively
evaluated. In the IRC’s opinion, the requirements likely reduced the overall value of the final
deal and created additional risks.

After the MOU was signed, the government instituted weekly update meetings between the
negotiating team and an ad hoc group of government officials, including senior civil servants
from several departments; the attendees received information and provided ongoing guidance
to the team. It is not clear that this government group had the necessary industry expertise
or experience with complex negotiations typical in energy megaprojects and power purchase
agreements to exercise effective oversight.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                        27

In conclusion, although Crown corporations are designed to advance policy objectives of the
government, they generally do so with more of an arm’s-length involvement by government
since they are also expected to achieve stated commercial objectives and to function like
businesses. In some other jurisdictions—British Columbia, for example—Crown corporations are
given annual mandate letters describing government priorities, then strategic and operational
decisions are left for the board of directors to oversee.4

In this situation, GNL oversight and intervention during negotiations effectively superseded the
NLH board’s governance role, contributing to a riskier and more expensive deal. In the opinion
of the IRC, governance of the MOU negotiation process did not meet the high standards
required by a project of this value, complexity, and importance.


4    https://www.bchydro.com/content/dam/BCHydro/customer-portal/documents/corporate/accountability-reports/
openness-accountability/bch-mandate-letter-2025-2026.pdf


28                                                 Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

5.       Economic Growth Benefits of Churchill River Power

Electricity Supply and Industrial Development
A reliable supply of hydroelectric power has the potential to create value for the province
not just through exports, which provide financial benefits, but also by stimulating economic
development when that power is retained within the province. Energy-intensive industries
such as mining, metal manufacturing, and data centres contribute to local employment, supply
chains, provincial GDP, and government tax revenues when they have access to reliable,
low-cost power, which can be a source of competitive advantage in global markets. The zero-
emissions profile of hydroelectric power is an additional source of value for certain industrial
users—the aluminum and steel sectors, for example—who can sell environmentally sustainable
products at premium market prices.

The broader economic importance of ample low-cost power is evident in Québec, where the
aluminum sector has benefited from Hydro-Québec’s significant hydroelectric generation
resources and favourable industrial electricity rates over many decades. The availability of
cheap hydropower is a core reason why Québec (QC) is the dominant producer and exporter
of aluminum in North America, accounting for 50% of U.S. imports.5 The aluminum sector
contributed $6.2 billion to Québec’s GDP in 2022 (direct impact), employing more than 11,000
workers.6 A 2022 report published by L’Institut du Québec estimated that the economic benefit
from electricity used by the aluminum sector was 26 times larger than the economic benefits to
the province from electricity exports.7,8

In Labrador, the mining sector has relied on access to Churchill Falls power to become an
important contributor to NL’s economy. The province has 25 of the 31 minerals identified
as critical in Canada, and has deposits of high-grade, low-impurity iron ore, nickel, cobalt,
manganese, and copper, which are essential for energy transition infrastructure and for


5    https://www.rbccm.com/en/insights/2025/02/how-us-steel-and-aluminum-tariffs-would-impact-canadas-economy

6    See Statistics Canada tables 36-10-0711-01 and 14-10-0202-01 for GDP and employment data by sector and province.

7    L’Institut du Québec (2022). Québec’s Renewable Electricity: Wealth Creation through Eco-Responsible Leveraging.
Short Report. The report received financial support from the Aluminum Association of Canada.
8    The 2022 report by L’Institut du Québec states (p. 11): “With regard to the evaluation of the most promising uses for
economic development, the following conclusions can be drawn: when electricity is used to support economic activities
in Québec, the economic benefits are significantly greater. In a process of identifying the most promising uses of the
blocks of electricity available to support economic development, Québec must therefore favour the sectors that use this
energy on Québec territory and that generate added value in Québec itself. . . . The same reasoning makes it possible
to underline that exports, on the other hand, do not constitute a good lever for wealth creation.” Québec’s aluminum
sector purchased 25.6 TWh of power from Hydro-Québec in 2021 (L’Institut du Québec, 2022). This excludes self-
generation by large aluminum producers Rio Tinto and Alcoa.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                               29

products such as low-carbon steel.9 Iron ore deposits in the Labrador trough, a long geologic
belt in western Labrador, are vast, offering mining opportunities for many generations.

Newfoundland and Labrador and Québec are the two major iron ore producing provinces
in Canada, competing in export markets with producers in Australia, China, and Brazil.10
Canada ranks sixth globally for its iron ore reserves (3% of global total) and eighth in iron ore
production (2% of global total in 2024). Major mining operations in NL are located in Labrador,
including the Iron Ore Company of Canada in Labrador West and Vale’s Voisey Bay site in
northern Labrador, which produces nickel, copper, and cobalt.

In 2025, Labrador’s iron ore mining sector accounted for $2.6 billion (2025 dollars) in direct
annual GDP contribution (estimated 6% of provincial GDP), approximately 3,500 employees,
and 30% of provincial exports (2022). Industrial customers in Labrador, mainly mining
companies, use approximately 300 MW of Churchill Falls capacity, so their direct economic
contribution is equivalent to about $1,400 GDP per MWh.11 The mining sector is also an
important contributor to GNL’s finances through mining and mineral rights taxes, corporate
income taxes, and provincial income taxes on employees’ labour income.

While NL’s mineral deposits are extensive, mining investment and production in western
Labrador has been constrained by access to sufficient power supply, a critical input for mining
operations. Under the existing Churchill Falls contract with CFLCo, NLH has rights to 525 MW
of the 5,428 MW total capacity, which serves industrial, commercial, and residential customers
in Labrador or else is sold to export markets. Every mining company representative that the
IRC interviewed cited the lack of additional power in Labrador as a binding constraint on
expanding production. Mining companies are unable to produce at maximum potential capacity
or to adopt modern processes due to power shortages, which have also inhibited entry and
investment by prospective new mining operators. In addition, one company’s representative
stated that existing operations would also be harmed without access to more power in the near
future.

Growth of the iron ore mining sector in NL has been relatively modest over the last two
decades, consistent with the impact of energy and infrastructure constraints. In 2007, NL and
QC had about the same level of iron ore economic output as measured by the sector’s GDP
contribution. Since 2007, QC’s iron ore mining sector has grown by 125% (4.9% compound
annual growth rate) in real GDP terms, while NL’s iron ore mining sector has grown by
significantly less: 45% (2.2% compound annual growth rate). NL’s share of national iron ore

9    Energy transition infrastructure is any physical or systemic infrastructure required to help shift away from fossil fuels.

10 https://natural-resources.canada.ca/minerals-mining/mining-data-statistics-analysis/minerals-metals-facts/iron-ore-
facts
11 This calculation assumes a capacity factor of 70% for Churchill Falls.


30                                                        Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

mining GDP has fallen from a peak of 61% in 2005 to 35% in 2024, due to more rapid growth in
Québec, notably from development of the Bloom Lake mine, which has the potential to double
its production.


Figure 1: Iron Ore Mining Sector GDP in NL and QC (1997–2024)

2,500


2,000
GDP (Millions, Chained 2017 dollars)


1,500


1,000


500


0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024
Iron Ore Mining in NL                  Iron Ore Mining in QC


Source: Statistics Canada, IRC


Economic Impact of Mining Sector Expansion in Labrador
The MOU acknowledges the economic benefits of increasing the power supply for industrial
customers in Labrador through the negotiated rights enabling NLH to access additional
Churchill Falls capacity beyond the existing 525 MW block. The MOU expands NLH’s access
to existing CF supply by 1,105 MW in stages over 30 years, beginning with an additional 305
MW in 2031, 300 MW between 2032 and 2035, a 250 MW expiring block in 2051, and a
final additional 250 MW expiring block in 2061. The MOU also includes 360 MW for NLH
from the new development projects before 2035, including 225 MW from the Gull Island
plant. The prices NLH will pay to CFLCo for all volumes it buys are to be finalized in Definitive
Agreements, but they have already been indicated by GNL on the OurChapter.ca website.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                                                                                                                                                           31

A key benefit for NL of the MOU is providing access to an additional 605 MW of CF capacity
before 2041 (the year in which, in the absence of the MOU, the current PPA expires). This can
enable the mining sector in Labrador to potentially double in size more than a decade earlier
than under the existing Churchill Falls PPA. The mining sector is well established in Labrador,
but other high-value-added, energy-intensive industries could potentially also be future users
of additional CF power, such as hydrogen, ammonia, and methanol producers, as well as
technology companies. The low cost of that power would give NL a key competitive advantage
in attracting investment to the province.

A limitation of the MOU, however, is the upper limit on the amount of CF capacity NLH can
access over the entire 51-year term of the PPA: up to 1,630 MW in total (comprised of 525
MW existing plus 1,105 MW new capacity), which is approximately a 210% increase from the
current amount. NLH anticipates, based on conversations with mining companies, that the
additional 605 MW will be fully utilized before 2041. The growth in CF capacity available to
NLH from 2025 to 2041 (from 525 MW to 1,130 MW) is equivalent to a 4.9% increase each
year.12 Including the additional 360 MW from the development projects, the growth rate in
total capacity available to NLH from 2025 to 2041 is equivalent to a 6.7% increase each year.
But after 2041, further industrial sector expansion over the next 34 years will be constrained
to a much lower growth rate, because only an additional 500 MW of CF capacity will become
available in this period—equivalent to a 0.9% increase each year. In other words, the MOU limit
on NLH’s access to additional CF power after 2041 could severely constrain the potential for
continued industrial sector expansion in Labrador over the three-decade period after 2041.

Although NLH sought access to additional CF capacity in its MOU negotiations, the full
economic impact benefits had not been quantified, making the true opportunity cost of yielding
marginal CF supply to HQ an unknown value.

The economic impact of mining expansion consists of direct and spinoff contributions to the
province’s GDP that are created by both the initial construction of new mining projects and by
future production and operations of the projects during their lifespans.13 In March 2024, the
GNL Department of Finance estimated the economic impact of MOU-enabled construction
of mining sector projects in Labrador. It used a standard economic model, incorporating data
from Statistics Canada and basic concept information from mining companies and NLH about
potential specific future mining projects. The economic impact model assumed that future
project investments totalling $29 billion ($21 billion, 2025 dollars) would occur between 2025
and 2061, facilitated by the additional 1,465 MW of new capacity that the MOU would make

12 This is the compound annual growth rate over the 16-year period from 2025 to 2041.

13 ‘Direct economic impacts’ reflect the GDP and jobs created directly by a project’s initial construction or operation
during the project lifespan. ‘Spinoff economic impacts’ are the combination of ‘indirect economic impacts’ (GDP and jobs
created by a project’s purchasing and contracting with suppliers) and ‘induced economic impacts’ (GDP and jobs that
result from household spending of labour income earned directly or indirectly from a project). For further discussion of
economic impacts, see https://www.canada.ca/en/impact-assessment-agency/services/policy-guidance/practitioners-
guide-impact-assessment-act/analyzing-health-social-economic-effects-impact-assessment-act.html


32                                                     Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

available to NLH.14 The economic contribution to GDP (direct and spinoff) from construction of
these mining projects was estimated to be $17 billion in 2025 dollars (see Table 2).

In March 2025, the GNL Department of Finance updated the economic impact analysis
to include preliminary rough estimates of GDP created during the production periods for
the mining projects. Such estimates are subject to greater uncertainty than estimates of
construction impacts given the need to make assumptions about model parameters over a
multi-decade time period. GDP contribution from the production phases of these projects
over their lifespans was estimated to total almost ten times larger—$161 billion (2025 dollars),
giving an overall total GDP impact from construction and production of $178 billion from
2025 to 2075. The annual average incremental GDP impact (direct and spinoff) from these
additional mining projects was estimated at $3.5 billion (2025 dollars). In other words, mining
sector expansion, enabled by access to an additional 1,465 MW of power capacity, could
approximately double the current annual contribution of the mining sector to provincial GDP
(to approximately $5 billion direct GDP per year in 2075).


Table 2 – Estimated Economic Impact of Iron Ore Mining Projects Enabled by MOU
(GDP Millions, 2025 dollars, and Employment, person-years)


Source: IRC analysis, Department of Finance


As a comparison, the total GDP impact from the MOU’s hydro generation construction projects
(Gull Island, CFX, CFU, and new transmission lines) was estimated by the Department of
Finance to be $15.2 billion (2025 dollars).

It is notable that the Department of Finance’s estimates of construction and production
economic impacts reveal stark differences in forecast iron ore mining sector growth rates over
the course of the MOU period. From 2025 to 2041, iron ore mining sector incremental real
GDP growth (resulting from MOU-enabled additional CF and new development power supply)
is estimated by the IRC to be approximately 4.5% per annum on average, but from 2042 to

14 The assumed iron ore mining projects included potential investments by existing companies active in the region and
two new greenfield projects equivalent in value to the Kami project that would be developed to utilize the two 250 MW
expiring blocks available to NLH in 2051 and 2061.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                            33

2075 it is close to zero, reflecting the smaller amount of new power capacity available over this
longer period compared to the earlier period.

The provincial government would directly benefit financially from the mining sector’s additional
contribution to GDP through higher corporate income taxes, mining and mineral rights taxes,
provincial income taxes on labour income, payroll taxes, and the provincial portion of HST.
These contributions are estimated to total $22.8 billion until 2075 (equivalent to 13% of the
total GDP impact), an average of approximately $450 million per year from 2025 to 2075. The
amount of government tax revenues would increase proportionately if a greater amount of CF
capacity were used in province.

In sum, the potential economic benefits from retaining and utilizing power in the province for
industrial development purposes are likely to be substantially greater than the financial benefits
from exporting power. Achieving economic benefits, however, is a more complex, uncertain,
and lengthier process than achieving the financial benefits that derive from exports, an issue
that the next section discusses.

An Economic Development Strategy for Industrial Sector Growth
While timely availability of a supply of new power is cited by mining companies as one of the
top critical factors in corporate investment decisions for Labrador projects, other factors play
an important role as well. The IRC’s conversations with mining company executives highlighted
several that are regarded as salient in NL:

•   Transmission Infrastructure: Additional power supply from Churchill Falls will require
complementary expansion of existing transmission line infrastructure, which is currently
at maximum capacity. A consortium of mining companies has explored joint investment
in a new 735 kilovolt (kV) line at an estimated cost of $2.5 billion, though the shifting
priorities and needs of consortium members have made progress challenging. One
executive described a chicken-and-egg problem: the need for additional transmission
capacity depends on forecast power availability, but the demand for additional
power also depends on expected transmission availability. In some other provinces,
governments have taken the lead in designating new transmission lines as strategic
priorities, directing regulatory approval of project need, in order to stimulate economic
development.15

•   Cost of Power: Overall iron ore mining production costs in Labrador are high relative to
some other jurisdictions—such as Australia, the global largest producer of iron ore—due

15 The Government of Ontario has been particularly active in approving new transmission lines ahead of industrial demand.
See https://news.ontario.ca/en/release/1006009/ontario-building-new-transmission-lines-to-power-growth-across-the-
province: “For Ontario’s energy-intensive industries—from greenhouses to auto manufacturing—access to affordable,
secure and reliable electricity isn’t optional, it’s essential. . . . By advancing these lines, we’re leveraging Ontario’s energy
advantage to unleash the full potential of our economy and ensure the energy system can power investment, support
increased production and protect jobs.”


34                                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

to the nature of the geology, the extraction process, climate conditions, and distance to
export markets, making the low cost of CF power for industrial customers in Labrador
an offsetting advantage. If industrial power rates were to increase significantly in the
future, the government would likely need to implement a rate mitigation strategy
in order to sustain industrial investment. The MOU will require GNL to clarify rate
mitigation policy.

•   Social Infrastructure: Mining investment and workforce expansion generate the need
for expanded social infrastructure in nearby communities—housing, healthcare services,
schools, recreational amenities, commercial services, and so forth—much of which
is controlled and funded at the municipal and provincial levels of government. The
availability of social infrastructure is critical for attracting private-sector employees to
mining project communities. A clearly articulated government plan for investing in new
social infrastructure is thus an important element of an overall industrial development
strategy.

•   Critical Mineral Market Conditions: Corporate investment decisions in new mining
projects are sensitive to global market conditions and commodity prices, which are
cyclical and variable, and which lead in turn to periods of capital abundance and capital
scarcity. Global iron ore prices, around US $100/tonne in early March 2026, are less than
half their recent peak (in mid-2021), which has caused some iron ore mining companies
to pause their capital investment plans. When market conditions improve, jurisdictions
that can offer sufficient energy and infrastructure capacity will be in a stronger position
to compete for globally mobile investment. There is thus a benefit for jurisdictions that
develop their infrastructure ahead of anticipated demand: they will be ready to attract
investment when demand does materialize.

Hence, realizing the economic growth potential in western Labrador from an improved
power supply—in the form of private investment by the mining sector—depends on the state
of key market and policy factors. GNL can play an important role in attracting new mining
and industrial investment by formulating and implementing policies in the context of an
integrated, long-term, industrial development and energy strategy that addresses physical
and social infrastructure needs. For instance, supporting and sanctioning a new transmission
line in western Labrador, clarifying future rate mitigation policy, and developing new social
infrastructure would all contribute to a more favourable investment environment.

In addition to the mining sector, other energy-intensive industries could potentially benefit from
new CF power capacity, including technology companies with rapidly growing, AI-based power
needs. Microsoft announced in late 2024 that it had agreed to a 20-year PPA with Constellation
Energy to restart part of Pennsylvania’s Three Mile Island nuclear plant, which will provide 825
MW of capacity.16 In October 2025, NextEra Energy announced a 25-year PPA with Google

16 https://www.constellationenergy.com/news/2024/Constellation-to-Launch-Crane-Clean-Energy-Center-Restoring-
Jobs-and-Carbon-Free-Power-to-The-Grid.html


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                      35

to supply 615 MW of nuclear power.17 Amazon is partnering with two U.S. utilities, Dominion
Energy and X-energy, to develop and procure 5 gigawatts (GW) of nuclear energy over the
next 15 years.18 These announcements point to a major new type of industrial power demand,
driven by recent technological innovation, that is creating new economic growth opportunities
for jurisdictions that have available power capacity.

Future Potential for Labrador’s Industrial Sector
NLH’s negotiated access to an additional 605 MW of existing capacity from Churchill Falls
and 360 MW from the new developments before 2041, and up to an additional 500 MW
after 2041, was based on its negotiations with HQ and its discussions with several mining
companies about their potential power needs in the medium term. However, the government-
approved negotiating mandate that NLH was given was not informed by a quantified analysis
of the full economic benefits to the province of mining or energy-intensive industry expansion
in Labrador. Had these benefits been fully estimated before negotiations commenced, even
if they were preliminary and uncertain, it is possible that the government would have placed
greater importance on securing a larger amount of existing Churchill Falls supply for use within
the province.

There are many possible alternative long-run growth scenarios for Labrador’s industrial
sector. One simple scenario builds on the IRC’s estimate, using Department of Finance data,
that, under the MOU, iron ore mining sector-related incremental real GDP growth averages
approximately 4.5% per annum during the 2025 to 2041 period and approximately zero in
the 2042 to 2075 period. Suppose instead that the incremental real GDP growth rate during
the 2042 to 2075 period was a modest 2% per annum, just under half the previous period’s
rate.19 Iron ore mining or industrial sector real GDP, growing at 2% per annum, would reach
approximately $11 billion (2025 dollars) by 2075, four times its 2025 level of contribution to
GDP. To enable this degree of mining or industrial sector expansion, NLH may need to utilize
3,000 MW of CF capacity by 2065. In this scenario, the estimated incremental cumulative
contribution to provincial GDP, including both direct and indirect impacts, from iron ore mining
or industrial sector growth during the period 2025 to 2075 could be approximately 65% ($115
billion) greater than the $178 billion estimate of the GDP benefit from the MOU scenario.

It should be stressed that this is a hypothetical scenario for illustrative purposes and is not a
prediction or forecast of what would likely happen in the future.


17   https://www.investor.nexteraenergy.com/news-and-events/news-releases/2025/10-27-2025-203948689

18   https://www.ans.org/news/article-6480/amazon-investing-in-smrs-to-deploy-5gw-by-2039/

19 This scenario assumes that the available power supply will increase by 3% per annum in order to enable industrial
growth in real terms.


36                                                     Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Although more comprehensive modelling and scenario analyses are needed—especially
considering the growth prospects in different energy-intensive industries—this preliminary
scenario indicates the potential significant economic benefit of securing greater Churchill Falls
capacity after 2041 beyond the MOU amounts and of fostering vigorous industrial sector
expansion. It also highlights a major risk for NLH, contained in the MOU: access to additional
CF power is contingent on NLH’s timely completion of milestones relating to the Gull Island and
CF Expansion projects. In the opinion of the IRC, this is not an acceptable risk for NLH given
the potential detrimental consequences for the NL economy.

The IRC is not able to conclude that NLH should necessarily target a greater share of CF power
beyond the MOU allocation. However, given the magnitude of the economic implications,
the IRC recommends that careful analysis of achievable economic benefits is needed before
engaging in further discussions with HQ.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     37

6.     Conclusions

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has several important aspects that are beneficial
for the province of Newfoundland and Labrador. Despite these benefits, however, the IRC
finds, based on the evidence it has reviewed, that the MOU as currently configured is not in the
overall best long-term interest of the people of the province.

We conclude this, in part, because of limitations in the MOU that were also a feature of the
1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract (as renewed in 2016). Specifically, these are limited rights
to use Churchill Falls power in the province over an extended period, problematic power pricing
models, governance control by a minority shareholder who is in a conflict of interest position as
a major customer, and restricted access to transmission infrastructure that would enable power
generated in Labrador to reach export markets. In our view, the government of Newfoundland
and Labrador has several significant decisions to make that could ultimately make the MOU
serve the public interest.

As it now exists, the MOU does offer improved financial and economic benefits to the
province. It increases the price of Churchill Falls power that the Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Company sells above the current contracted price before 2041, and the forecast price for
Churchill Falls power after 2041 is reasonable (subject to improvements in timing of payments)
compared to HQ’s forecast cost of alternative sources of supply. Newfoundland and Labrador
Hydro (NLH) and the province will benefit directly from the resulting improved financial
performance of CFLCo. The MOU provides NLH with access to additional power from Churchill
Falls before 2041, which is expected to bring economic growth benefits to the province
through expansion of the mining sector and other energy-intensive industries. The province will
also gain from the development and equity ownership (through NLH) of a major new generation
asset (Gull Island)—and achieve that without bearing full construction-cost risk. Building a new
power generating facility at Gull Island, new transmission lines, and the Churchill Falls Upgrades
and CF Expansion projects will all bring short-term economic benefits and jobs to the province.

These benefits, and the related risks, of the MOU to the province have not been clearly or
completely communicated to the public, contributing to confusion about its true financial and
economic value. The total financial benefit to the provincial treasury of the overall MOU is best
represented by the net present value amount, which is estimated at approximately $31 billion
(including estimated rate mitigation costs) rather than by the $227 billion nominal amount
presented in government documents. Of the $31 billion total, $9.2 billion will be received
prior to 2042. The new NLH CF PPA will provide forecast benefits of $1.3 billion NPV (net of
rate mitigation) while the new HQ CF PPA is forecast to provide $7.3 billion NPV of financial
benefits to the province. This $7.3 billion NPV amount is effectively the financial benefits at
risk to the province before 2042 if the MOU is not implemented.


38                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The majority of the MOU’s financial benefit is attributable to the proposed new Churchill Falls
PPA, which has a present value of payments to the provincial treasury of approximately $26
billion (after estimated rate mitigation) over 51 years. The amount of HQ’s total payments that
ultimately flow through to the province in the form of CFLCo dividends, water rentals, and
royalties, is forecast to be $23 billion (NPV). The development projects contribute much less
in terms of financial benefits to the province. The present value of financial benefits to the
treasury relating to the Churchill Falls Upgrades and CF Expansion projects is close to zero
dollars over the PPA terms. The present values of financial benefits relating to the Gull Island
and NLH transmission projects are $4.1 billion and $0.8 billion, respectively.

The economic benefits of GDP growth and job creation resulting from the MOU were also not
fully communicated to the public, in part because the full economic impact of industrial and
mining sector expansion that improved power access would enable was not estimated during
preparation for the MOU negotiations. Subsequent estimates indicate a significant uplift to
GDP— amounting to an estimated $178 billion (in 2025 dollars)—from the direct and spinoff
economic stimulus of new mining project investments and operations during the period from
2025 to 2075. Approximately $48 billion (in 2025 dollars) of these GDP benefits are forecast
to occur from 2025 to 2041. In addition, the GDP impact associated with the construction
of Gull Island, the CF Expansion and CF Upgrades projects, and NLH’s new transmission line
is estimated to be approximately $15 billion (2025 dollars). The absence of comprehensive
information on potential economic benefits to the province, even though they are harder to
estimate than financial benefits, may have resulted in their being under-weighted during MOU
negotiations and public discussion.

Against these financial and economic benefits, however, significant limitations of the MOU
should be considered, and they arise from several fundamental issues.

The first and most important issue is identifying how value for the province should be created
from the low-cost, dispatchable, clean power produced at Churchill Falls. There are two ways
to generate value from such a resource: it can be exported at the highest price available—
providing financial value—or it can be retained in the province for use by energy-intensive
industries, and thereby also create broader economic value (as industrial companies invest,
operate, and grow). A fundamental challenge of the renewed 1969 Churchill Falls Power
Contract with Hydro-Québec was that NL gained little financial or economic benefit from
Churchill Falls in the decades that followed. This was a consequence of the low fixed-price
contract and, importantly, NLH’s limited, inflexible access to CF power, which has constrained
natural resource sector development in Labrador. Mining companies located in Labrador
reported to the IRC that the lack of available power supply is a core constraint on their
businesses and one of the main factors affecting corporate investment decisions. Since 2007,
Labrador’s iron ore mining sector, which contributed $2.6 billion to the province’s GDP in 2025
(in 2025 dollars), has grown at half the rate (in real GDP growth terms) of Québec’s iron ore
mining sector, yet it is mainly located in the same geographic region.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     39

The MOU improves on the 1969 Churchill Falls Power Contract by increasing NLH’s access to
existing CF facility power by 605 MW before 2041 and up to a maximum of 30% of total CF
capacity by 2061 (up from 10% in 2024). However, a significant limitation of the MOU is that
it provides up to only an additional 500 MW of capacity from CF and the new development
projects to NLH in the 33-year period from 2042 to 2075, which is likely to constrain further
industrial growth and economic development. The IRC estimates that if the mining sector, or
other energy-intensive industries, had access to more CF capacity after 2041 than proposed
in the MOU—and thus were able to grow at a modestly higher rate than projected—the
incremental contribution to GDP could be $115 billion (2025 dollars) more in the 2025 to 2075
period, or 65% greater, than the economic benefit forecast under the MOU. More detailed
modelling is required, but these preliminary estimates indicate the potential magnitude of
future economic growth benefits associated with in-province use of CF power. In sum, although
the MOU increases the financial value for this province (achieved from exporting CF power to
Québec), there is at the same time a significant lost opportunity of potential economic benefits
that would accrue from retaining more power in the province.

Hence, a key decision for GNL is defining the optimal balance of financial versus economic
value that GNL wishes to achieve from Churchill Falls over the coming decades. We believe
that future economic development strategy and planning should be led by the government and
integrated into NLH’s long-term infrastructure plans, a key step that was not performed prior to
negotiating the MOU.

From a financial perspective, there are important limitations and risks of the MOU. Risks arise
from problematic pricing and payment structures. The price of CF power after 2041 is largely
determined by HQ’s avoided replacement cost rather than by external market prices, which
could be achieved if NLH secured transmission access through Québec or alternate routes. And
under the CF PPA, the back-weighted schedule of nominal payments toward the later years of
the term exposes GNL to future inflation risk, which could reduce the real value of payments.
The CFU and CFX projects provide little financial benefit to the province. Finally, the atypical
pricing model and other commercial arrangements for Gull Island lead to a significant nominal
revenue shortfall and outstanding debt, dividend, and equity balances at the end of the PPA
period, a financial risk for both NLH and the province.

The second key issue regarding the Churchill River projects is the question of whether it is in
the best long-term public interest for NLH to expand a joint ownership relationship with HQ
through a new, 60/40 joint venture for the Gull Island project.

Establishing a joint venture between NLH and HQ for the development of Gull Island is a
major, long-term, and likely permanent decision that has important risks. Joint ventures are
often challenging to sustain in the long run: owners’ interests tend to diverge over time as
their circumstances change, even if they were aligned initially. Conflicts between joint venture
shareholders are especially likely to arise when there is an inherent conflict of interest, as when
a shareholder is also a major customer of the corporation. Once a joint venture is established


40                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

it can be difficult to change ownership or control, since shareholders cannot be forced to
relinquish their rights, making initial decisions about ownership and governance arrangements
especially critical.

The IRC finds that alternative ownership arrangements for developing Gull Island that are
commonly used in the energy sector – such as Participation Agreements, Public-Private
Partnerships, and Build-Operate-Transfer models – were not sufficiently considered before
negotiations commenced between NLH and HQ, and that it would be in the public interest to
do so.

The third key issue with the MOU relates to how the negotiation process between NLH and
HQ was overseen. GNL, which appointed the three-person negotiating team, initially sought
to establish a balance between government and NLH board oversight, but the practical effect
over time was greater government control over the team and key negotiation decisions.
The IRC’s view is that the NLH board did not exercise its full governance authority over
negotiations, and that government intervention over-reached in a way that was harmful to
negotiated outcomes.

In the absence of detailed commercial and policy negotiation targets, the government actively
directed certain negotiation outcomes and required the negotiating team to obtain its approval
for key decisions. At various stages of the negotiations, GNL required that several specific
commercial outcomes be included in the MOU. The full financial and economic implications
of these requirements were not comprehensively evaluated, and they likely reduced the
commercial value of the final deal and introduced risks.

In the opinion of the IRC, governance of the MOU negotiation process did not meet the high
standards demanded by a project of this scale, complexity, and importance. The governance
and oversight arrangements used for these kinds of negotiations can have a fundamental effect
on their outcome—choosing which to apply is thus another central decision for GNL to make as
it considers the best approach for future negotiations.

The fourth key issue with the MOU concerns the short-term financial benefits to NL that could
be obtained from Churchill Falls under a new power purchase agreement. Currently, the CF
plant has no long-term debt, which creates a significant yet unrealized financing opportunity
for CFLCo. NLH’s expert advisors estimated the CF balance sheet could support approximately
$8 billion of new long-term debt under the MOU’s proposed new Churchill Falls PPA. If the CF
Upgrades and CF Expansion projects were financed on a stand-alone basis—not on the basis
of the CF balance sheet as proposed in the MOU—this debt, supported by a renewed PPA,
could provide NLH and HQ with an immediate enhanced dividend payment of up to the $8
billion. This opportunity, which is directly associated with the MOU, has not been completely
investigated, primarily because of how the 2% escalating revenue model affected financing of
the Churchill Falls Upgrades and Expansion projects. Any new PPA that features a higher price
for CF power than the current price and a medium duration would support improved dividend
capacity and provide a one-time financial benefit for the province.

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                      41

7.     Recommendations


Recommendation 1: GNL should determine, based on a comprehensive analysis of long-run
economic development options, the extent to which power generation from the Churchill
River should provide financial versus economic value to the province over time.
New strategic work should be undertaken to identify and understand opportunities for
Churchill River power to stimulate growth of the NL economy and to develop an economic
development vision and strategy for the province. The key decision for GNL is: how much
power from the Churchill River should NLH retain within the province for economic growth
purposes (economic value) and how much should be exported and under what type of
commercial arrangements (financial value).

Recommendation 2: GNL should sanction and support NLH construction of new transmission
line capacity between Churchill Falls and Labrador West in order to enable economic growth
of the province’s energy-intensive industries.
This recommendation is independent of the outcome of negotiations between NLH and HQ,
given the urgent need to address critical power supply shortages in Labrador West that are
constraining economic development in that region.

Recommendation 3: GNL and NLH should remain committed to the objective of building
respectful relationships with and consulting Indigenous communities in connection with
future developments on the Churchill River and in Labrador.
The IRC received submissions from several Indigenous groups and affirms the importance of
the parties respectfully engaging and consulting with Indigenous groups.

Recommendation 4: GNL should rigorously evaluate alternative ownership, operating, and
right-of-use models for new hydroelectric generation at Gull Island that are consistent with
the province being the primary beneficiary of the financial and economic value created.
Participation Agreements, Public-Private Partnerships, and Build-Operate-Transfer are
alternative models for power generation projects that offer different arrangements for their
ownership and use while still allowing the province to maintain long-term control and to
maximize value. A comprehensive analysis of all strategic alternatives for Gull Island will inform
GNL on how best to achieve its financial, economic, and strategic objectives.


42                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Recommendation 5: GNL and NLH should prepare for future negotiations with HQ by
preparing a fully articulated negotiation strategy and best-practice governance process.
Future negotiation strategy should include detailed commercial and policy goals, alternative
options, and measurable outcome targets. The importance or value of each goal and alternative
should be carefully evaluated and quantified in advance, and trade-offs between policy goals
should be identified and clarified.

GNL should establish an independent governing body composed of industry experts that is
appropriately resourced and compensated to oversee negotiations. The governing body should
agree on a specific mandate and negotiation objectives with GNL, and it should retain its own
independent, industry expert support. The governing body should be responsible for reporting
to GNL on the progress of negotiations.

GNL should be aware of the risks of actively intervening in commercial negotiations once
objectives are defined and the negotiation mandate agreed on. GNL should also consider
retaining its own industry experts to provide impartial, informed advice independent of the
governing body.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                    43

8.    IRC Responses to the Order’s Suggested Considerations

The IRC was asked to evaluate whether the MOU was “in the best long-term interest of the
people of NL” and to consider 15 specific questions that were posed in the IRC’s terms of
reference (see Appendix 1). The IRC considers the “best long-term interest of the people of
NL” (shortened to ‘public interest’ for brevity) to mean maximizing the economic and financial
benefits of the province’s natural resources in order to create long-term prosperity for the
people of the province.


In conducting the inquiry, the inquiry committee is encouraged to
consider the following:


(a) whether the negotiators representing Newfoundland and Labrador
Hydro and the government of the province were given an appropriate
mandate before beginning the negotiations with Hydro-Québec that
resulted in the Memorandum of Understanding, and whether any
such mandate was consistent with the final report of the Commission
of Inquiry Respecting the Muskrat Falls Project, advice from the 2041
Churchill River Management Expert Panel and any other reports the
inquiry committee considers relevant

Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro created a principles-based mandate for the Churchill
Falls negotiations in early 2023. It was approved by both the NLH board and the provincial
government. The mandate’s five principles were designed to guide negotiations. Five additional
objectives were stated in the mandate presentation to government by NLH. Together, the
principles and the objectives were consistent with the final report of the Commission of
Inquiry Respecting the Muskrat Falls Project and with advice from the 2041 Churchill River
Management Expert Panel (2041 Panel).

The mandate was, however, very high level. It gave the MOU negotiators no detailed
commercial or public policy objectives, which made it difficult to objectively evaluate whether
or not negotiations were progressing toward the specific desired outcomes. Documents made
available to the IRC referenced the need to produce a detailed negotiation mandate, but this
did not occur. Although the negotiating team arguably achieved several of the Churchill Falls
mandate’s principles and objectives in the final MOU, others were not achieved.

Additionally, the relative importance of each of the mandate principles was not
comprehensively established or quantified before negotiations commenced, nor was there a


44                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

full analysis of the impact of trade-offs (such as between financial or economic objectives) that
could be made in relation to each principle. For example, the economic impact of increasing the
power supply to NLH from Churchill Falls was not assessed, making it difficult to understand
the comparative merit of retaining power in the province versus exporting it to Québec.

In mid-2024, NLH drafted a second principles-based mandate for the negotiations around
developing a power facility at Gull Island. It, too, was approved by the government and by the
NLH board. This mandate resembled the Churchill Falls mandate in structure, and it led to a
similar negotiation path.

In the absence of prescribed, detailed targets for the Churchill Falls and Gull Island negotiations,
GNL assumed a more active oversight role during negotiations. GNL introduced specific
commercial outcomes the negotiating team was to achieve at various stages during the
process. For example, early in negotiations, the government required that benefits to the
province be increased by $17 billion by 2041, arising from HQ’s payments to CFLCo. After the
Gull Island mandate was approved, GNL required that the pricing model for the development
projects incorporate a 2% annual revenue escalation clause. GNL decision-makers regarded
such directions to the negotiating team as an evolution of the mandate principles and of the
negotiations. However, it is not clear that GNL fully appreciated the trade-off between the
financial and economic impacts of such requirements nor their consequences for other aspects
of the negotiations.

These interventions also created new interdependences between the Churchill Falls and Gull
Island negotiations,                                                           Commingling
the MOU components meant some value originally achieved within the Churchill Falls
negotiation was traded away to get results in the negotiations concerning the development
projects.


Following industry practice, negotiators would have a detailed mandate and the ability to make
decisions in synchronization with the flow of negotiations. During the MOU negotiations,
however, the negotiating team stated that they did not have authority to make major decisions.
Instead, they had to seek approval from GNL, a situation that introduced time delays and
uncertainty for both negotiating parties. It is notable, too, that key negotiation decisions did
not require formal approval by the NLH board, further emphasizing the direct influence GNL
had on negotiation outcomes. This practice and structure was harmful to the results of the
negotiation—they likely reduced the value of the Churchill Falls PPA and created costs for the
Gull Island Joint Venture that make it harder to finance.

In the opinion of the IRC, the mandate principles approved for the MOU negotiating team
were appropriate and also consistent with previous expert report recommendations. However,
because the mandates were not accompanied by detailed commercial or policy negotiation


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       45

targets or by a comprehensive analysis of the financial and economic value of each principle,
they consequently deviated from the 2041 Report recommendations.


(b) whether claims made about revenue the Memorandum of
Understanding would generate, and the resultant forecasted benefits
to the provincial treasury, were accurate and reasonable, including
a review of how the total value of $33.8 billion (on a net present
value basis) in Schedule F of the Memorandum of Understanding,
total forecasted payments to be made to Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Corporation Limited by Hydro-Québec and how the annual schedule
of forecasted payment amounts in Schedule G of the Memorandum
of Understanding were determined and why

In its review, the IRC determined that some of GNL’s statements about the forecast revenues
and financial benefits expected to be generated by the MOU components were accurate. Some
others, however, were understated, overstated, or incomplete, which can misrepresent the
ultimate results of the completed deal and cause public confusion. In addition, the body of the
MOU presented the agreed financial value of target payments in present value terms (in 2024
dollars), while the government mainly presented financial benefits as forecast nominal dollar
amounts (absolute figures that do not adjust for future inflation), making the real revenues and
benefits of each project difficult to understand.

For example, the government:

•   Understated the forecast payments by NLH to CFLCo due to the exclusion of payments
for the expiring blocks of power allocated to NLH in 2051 and 2061. Forecast payments
were stated to be $65 billion but the amount is $83 billion (nominal).20

•   Overstated forecast benefits from CF by not including rate mitigation, which the IRC
estimates to be $48 billion (nominal, $5.4 billion present value).

•   Omitted the estimated economic and job creation benefits from increased production
and operations by the industrial sector in Labrador during the period 2025 to 2075 as
a result of increased access to power. The IRC estimates the GDP benefit to be $160
billion (2025 dollars).

In the IRC’s opinion, a more appropriate presentation of the MOU’s revenues and benefits—all
of which will be realized in the future—should be stated in present value (today’s dollar) terms,
a standard approach in financial analyses. Due to the impact of inflation and rising prices of
goods and services over time, a dollar received 20 years from now has much lower purchasing

20 See https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/OurChapter_WebResource_RevenuesExpensesDividends_3.pdf


46                                               Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

power and is less valuable than a dollar received today. Thus, expressing future forecast
revenues and benefits in present value terms gives a more appropriate basis of presentation of
the financial value of a project than does a nominal dollar amount.

At the time of the MOU’s announcement, GNL published four documents that included
statements about the expected financial benefits to the province: a presentation titled “A New
Chapter for Hydroelectric Generation in Labrador,”21 a fact sheet titled “The Churchill’s New
Chapter,”22 a table titled ”Breakdown of Energy Allocation from Churchill Falls Plant to Hydro-
Québec and Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro”,23 and a document titled “Financial Benefit to
Newfoundland & Labrador Treasury.”24 The majority of the financial numbers they contain are
stated in nominal dollar terms.

The documents reference two amounts that are explicitly stated in the MOU in present value
(today’s dollar) terms: $33.8 billion is the target present value (2024 dollars) of HQ’s payments
to CFLCo over the term of the new Churchill Falls PPA, and $3.5 billion is the present value
(2024 dollars) of HQ’s payment for the right to co-develop new projects in Labrador (the
development fee).

The challenge with presenting nominal dollar sums of forecast financial payments and benefits
over many years is that the value of a nominal dollar changes over time due to price inflation.
For example, a standard cup of coffee that cost $1 in 1990 now costs $2.15 today thanks to
inflation. Nominal payment schedules over multiple year periods can be structured in multiple
ways that will yield the same present value over time. For example, a CF PPA price set at
$5.9 ¢/kWh in 2025 and escalating at 2% each year thereafter, as described by NLH executives
in the House of Assembly on January 7th, 2025, will lead to a present value of $33.8 billion,
when discounted at 5.822%. However, this pricing model results in a total nominal payment
amount of $125 billion over the period 2025 to 2075 (which is $70 billion less than Schedule
G payments stated in the MOU). Similarly, a higher nominal value does not necessarily imply a
higher present value, as this depends on the timing of payments over the relevant time period.
In fact, a project with a lower nominal total payment could have a higher present value if the
annual payments are weighted more heavily toward the earlier years.

In order to evaluate the financial benefits of the MOU to the provincial treasury, the IRC
used the net present value of each of the projects provided by NLH and its expert advisors
(see Table 1, reproduced below). In doing so, the IRC made various assumptions and
simplifications that are documented in the Table’s footnote. The IRC received, reviewed, and
assessed information provided by NLH, its expert advisors, and GNL. The IRC did not audit or

21 https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/NewfoundlandLabrador-Quebec-MOU-Briefing-Deck-Dec-12-2024.pdf

22 https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/Churchill-Falls_FactSheet_Print.pdf

23 https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/OurChapter_WebResource_EnergyAllocationBreakdown.pdf

24   https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/OurChapter_WebResource_RevenuesExpensesDividends_3.pdf


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         47

independently confirm the numbers provided. The only independent calculations performed
for Table 1 were an estimate of rate mitigation and an estimate of the provincial benefits of
expiring block revenues. The IRC completed these calculations as it believed rate mitigation
to be material to the financial assessment of the MOU, and NLH had not completed it for the
post-2041 period.


Table 1 – Summary of Financial Benefits to the Provincial Treasury from the MOU25


2025–2041 NPV 2042–2075 NPV                     TOTAL NPV
Financial Benefits of the MOU                             ($ million    ($ million                     ($ million
2024 dollars) 2024 dollars)                  2024 dollars)

Dividends, rents and royalties from:
HQ flowing through CFLCo                           $7,347              $15,693             $23,040
NLH flowing through CFLCo                            1,818                5,236               7,054
NLH expired blocks flowing through CFLCo                                   0                1,173               1,173
Total flow-through benefits from CFLCo                              9,165               22,102              31,267

CF Upgrade                           0                     0                     0
CF Expansion                           0                    68                    68
Total CF/CFU/CFX                          9,165                22,170               31,335


Less estimated rate mitigation                          (515)               (4,860)              (5,375)
Net Benefits to Treasury from CF/CFU/CFX                                8,650                17,310               25,960


Gull Island Joint Venture (2025–2085)                              394                  3,731               4,125
NL Transmission                          128                    692                  820
NPV of Benefits from MOU                             9,172                 21,733              30,905


25 The IRC has included forecast revenue related to NLH’s anticipated payments for the two CF expired blocks, which was
not included in the GNL information. Since the pricing for expired blocks is still to be determined, the IRC assumed NLH
will pay the same price for power as Schedule G forecasts for HQ. The NPV of the flow-through benefit payments to
GNL is $1.1 billion (2025 dollars).The IRC did not include an estimate of NLH’s forecast net profit between 2025 and
2041 under the current CF PPA, which should be considered when assessing the “increase” in benefits provided by the
MOU to the provincial treasury. Estimated rate mitigation costs were not calculated for NLH’s potential recall of 360
MW of Gull Island power. The table excludes the amount of unpaid dividends owing to NLH by the Gull Island Joint
Venture corporation at the end of the PPA period. Further analysis should also consider the potential impact of MOU
financial benefits on federal equalization payments to Newfoundland and Labrador.


48                                                     Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The IRC estimated that the overall financial benefit to the provincial treasury of the MOU is
approximately $30.9 billion dollars in net present value terms (2024 dollars) after rate mitigation
costs, which were excluded from the GNL-published nominal benefits of the MOU. Rate
mitigation occurs when government provides subsidies to consumers to help offset the impact
of steep increases in electricity prices and bills. The government stated that it would implement
rate mitigation for residential and general customers, and industrial customers would see no
immediate rise in rates.26

The vast majority of the financial benefit is attributable to the new Churchill Falls PPAs ($26
billion after rate mitigation), with payments arising from HQ accounting for $23 billion (2024
dollars). Gull Island and the NLH transmission projects have net present values of $4.1 billion
and $0.8 billion, respectively. The CF Upgrades and CF Expansion projects have minimal NPVs.

The IRC also estimated the net present value of the MOU for two distinct periods, from 2025
to 2041 (that is, up until the year in which the current Churchill Falls PPA will expire) and from
2042 to 2075 (and 2025 to 2085 for the Gull Island project). Between 2025 and 2041, the
MOU has an estimated net present value (2024 dollars) of $9.2 billion (after rate mitigation)
for the provincial treasury. Most of this amount ($7.3 billion NPV in 2024 dollars) derives from
HQ’s payments to CFLCo. Hence, $7.3 billion NPV is the estimated financial benefit at risk to
the treasury before 2042 if the CF PPA for HQ contemplated in the MOU is not finalized in
Definitive Agreements.

How the $33.8 Billion Value in Schedule F and the Schedule G Payments Were Determined
and Why
Schedule F’s $33.8 billion (2024 dollars) is the negotiated target present value of the volumes
of energy allocated to HQ during the term of the CF PPA. In addition, NLH will make revenue
payments to CFLCo for the power it purchases, which are forecast to total $12.1 billion (PV,
2024 dollars) over 51 years.27 The present value of CFLCo’s forecast revenues paid by HQ and
NLH is thus $45.9 billion.28

The IRC estimated that HQ’s payments for Churchill Falls power are equivalent to a levelized
cost of electricity of 3.8 ¢/kWh during the 2025 to 2041 period, and 16.7 ¢/kWh in the 2042
to 2075 period, which is close to HQ’s estimated replacement cost of power. Details of this
calculation are in Appendix 5. The lower cost of power in the 2025 to 2041 period reflects the


26 https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/NewfoundlandLabrador-Quebec-MOU-Briefing-Deck-Dec-12-2024.pdf
27 GNL stated that the amount of NLH payments for CF power would be $12.1 billion (PV) at https://www.ourchapter.ca/
files/OurChapter_WebResource_EnergyAllocationBreakdown.pdf.
28 The nominal value of NLH’s payments for Churchill Falls power under the MOU is estimated to be $65 billion as
presented in the GNL summary table “Financial Benefit to Newfoundland & Labrador Treasury,” which is published on
OurChapter.ca, plus $17.6 billion in revenue payments for the two 250 MW expiring block volumes. This latter amount
was omitted from the GNL summary table and calculation of the nominal $260 billion overall total forecast payments
($195 billion from HQ, $65 billion from NLH).


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                                           49

negotiated weights on each of the CF pricing blocks described in Schedule F, three of which
relate to regulated electricity rates or replacement costs in Québec, and one of which relates to
an external energy market price. Before 2041, most of the negotiated weights are on Québec-
regulated electricity rate and replacement costs, which has one block at very low energy prices
in the first 17 years, with only a relatively small weight placed on the external energy market
block. The reason this weighting was agreed was in part to mitigate the impact of sharp rate
increases on customers in Québec and NL.

In the 2025 to 2041 period, the financial benefit to the GNL treasury from HQ’s Churchill Falls
payments (see Table 1, above) is $7.3 billion net present value (2024 dollars). This amount can
be interpreted as NLH’s share of the total residual value for HQ of the existing PPA (in which
the price HQ pays for power is significantly lower) over the remaining 17 years of its term
(2025 to 2041). HQ retains the majority of the total residual value associated with the existing
CF PPA.

Schedule G is the agreed schedule of nominal annual payments by HQ to CFLCo which, when
discounted at the negotiated 5.822% rate, equals $33.8 billion (PV, see Appendix 4). There are
many possible permutations of nominal payments over the 51-year PPA term that would also
give a net present value of $33.8 billion. Schedule G was negotiated as a sequence of payments
in each year, with the desire by HQ to gradually phase in power prices and for NLH to target an
increase of $17 billion (nominal) in benefits to the provincial treasury prior to 2042.

The majority of HQ’s total nominal payment amount occurs in the last 15 years of its new
PPA, after 2061. Less than a quarter of the nominal total is scheduled to be paid in the first
half of the PPA term (before 2052). This delays the financial benefits of the new PPA to the
province and exposes the value of the payments to inflation risk in comparison to a schedule
where payments are distributed earlier within the PPA term. In the opinion of the IRC, all
else being equal, bringing the payments in Schedule G forward in time, and reducing the total
nominal amount while retaining the $33.8 billion present value, would be in the public interest.
Notably, by the end of the proposed new PPA term, the CF facility will be over 100 years old,
which could result in operational risk. In the opinion of the IRC, the profile of HQ’s Schedule G
nominal payment amounts is not reasonable and creates financial risks for GNL.

Revenues and Benefits of the New Development Projects
Revenues and benefits for the new development projects were presented by the government in
purely nominal terms. The IRC finds that the government’s claims about the nominal revenues
for the new development projects were reasonably stated. However, annual revenues for the
GIJV project are not sufficient to cover true costs for the first 45 years of the PPA.


50                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The IRC was provided the nominal payments and the present value amounts (2024 dollars)
of the forecast revenue payments and financial benefits to GNL for the new development
projects (see Table 3).


Table 3 – Financial Payments and Benefits of the New Development Projects ($millions)

Nominal and Net Present Values Gull Island           CFX     CFU     NLH          Total
of Payments and Benefits                                             Transmission

Nominal revenue payments by      106,814             13,452 5,823    13,074         139,163
HQ and NLH
NPV of payments (2024 dollars) 15,766                2,308   1,157   2,155          21,386
NPV of financial benefits to GNL 4,125               68      0       820            5,013


Nominal revenues of the new development projects are affected by the MOU stipulation
that pricing terms deliver a 2% per annum escalation of revenue over the term of the PPAs.
To accomplish this, prices during much of the PPA term are artificially low such that revenues
do not fully cover total costs. The IRC finds that the revenue shortfall results in earned but
unremitted dividends and outstanding debt and equity balances at the end of the PPAs.
Consequently, the forecast financial benefits to the province from the new development
projects are not reasonable because revenues do not fully cover true costs for 45 years, and
therefore the earned dividends will not have been remitted to the province prior to the end of
the PPAs.


(c)   whether the sufficiency of water rental or royalties, or both, were or
should have been considered

The MOU leaves water management and water rental issues to the yet-to-be negotiated
Definitive Agreements, so the sufficiency of these matters is not known. NLH has performed
an assessment of the existing water rental and royalty regime and of alternatives for both
Churchill Falls and Gull Island. In the opinion of the IRC, it provides appropriate guidance for
the settlement of these issues.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         51

(d) whether claims about how many full-time jobs would be created for
the residents of the province were based upon reasonable current
cost estimates and how this number compares to the estimated total
number of jobs that would be created in the province

In 2024, the GNL Department of Finance estimated the jobs that would be created by the
development projects using current preliminary construction cost estimates provided to it by
NLH. Job and GDP impact estimates were provided for both the construction periods of these
projects and for construction of identified potential new mining projects in Labrador.

NLH and HQ have begun to develop together the supplier procurement policies that will result
in the local benefits described.

The 2024 GNL Department of Finance estimates did not include employment and GDP impacts
from ongoing production and operations of the identified new mining projects. The overall
provincial job and GDP benefits arising from the MOU are thus likely to be significantly greater
than initially estimated. The section on Economic Growth Benefits in this report provides more
information on this topic.


(e) whether alternative markets for power were considered, including
pursuing opportunities with entities other than Hydro-Québec,
concerning both existing and potential hydropower assets on the
Churchill River

One of the expert advisors for NLH studied export markets that Churchill Falls power
could potentially reach for direct sale of electricity outside of and through Québec. There
is significant demand in external markets for the clean, capacity-based power that Churchill
Falls provides, and large customers can make long-term energy supply plans extending up to
25 years. Gaining transmission access to external customers and markets through Québec,
however, is an uncertain prospect for NLH because of existing firm bookings on transmission
lines and a high level of capacity utilization. One way to resolve such uncertainty is for a power
generator to submit a firm transmission booking request based on a contract with a U.S.-based
customer for future delivery of power that previously flowed into Québec but that would no
longer be serving HQ customers. This matches the approach used by NLH to secure its current
265 MW of transmission access to U.S. markets.

recognized the complexities of gaining transmission access through Québec for
large amounts of CF power, but it recommended investigating export sales in order to be fully
informed and up to date. The IRC did not receive evidence that NLH has sought agreements
with specific potential major customers in the United States or other markets for power
delivery after 2041, although 2041 is within the planning time horizons of large customers
requiring long-term energy security.

52                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Another important market for Churchill River power is within NL, notably the demand from
energy-intensive industrial customers. NLH identified probable short-term to medium-term
power demand in Labrador based on its discussions with mining and industrial customers about
their projected power needs over the next decade. However, the IRC did not find evidence that
GNL had assessed long-run industrial economic development scenarios, which would determine
long-run power needs, before the MOU negotiations commenced. Such assessments could
have informed NLH’s negotiations with HQ over long-term allocations of Churchill Falls power
volumes in the new CF PPA.

In the absence of extensive evaluation of these alternative markets, the IRC finds that NLH
under-valued the scenario in which a new PPA with HQ is not reached – which could have
made NLH more willing to accept a new deal – and under-valued the importance of obtaining
greater long-term access to Churchill Falls power beyond 2041.


(f)   whether the economic opportunities and social benefits related to
the proposed development projects for Churchill Falls and Gull Island
were considered independently and whether more benefits could be
achieved by developing them separately

The economic opportunities and social benefits associated with the development projects at
Churchill Falls and Gull Island were assessed independently in terms of their contributions to
employment, labour income and GDP from the construction of each project. The evaluation of
these economic benefits was conducted by the GNL Department of Finance. Gull Island, being
a significantly larger project than the CF Upgrades and CF Expansion, has larger estimated
economic benefits.

NLH considers that the total economic benefits from the development projects would be
greater if they were developed in a co-ordinated manner rather than separately. Transmission
system planning, sizing, and routing can be more efficiently achieved when considering the
developments as a whole. Isolated project development increases the risk of inefficiencies,
capacity constraints, and sub-optimal investments. Coordinating the overlapping timelines
for construction of each project can also reduce potential labour and supply-chain resource
constraints.


(g) whether there are any barriers to maximizing export opportunities

The existing transmission infrastructure from Churchill Falls through Québec is owned by
Hydro-Québec. It is the most direct and developed route connecting Churchill Falls to export
markets in Canada and the United States. The transmission lines in Québec are currently
used near capacity by HQ for energy consumption in the province and for power exported to


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     53

the United States and other markets (36 TWh of net exports in 2025).29 This situation limits
transmission availability for other power producers.

NLH, through its Power Marketing Division, exports a small amount of power through Québec
(265 MW to the United States), which demonstrates that obtaining some access is feasible.
NLH reports, however, that expanding power export opportunities via transmission through
the province of Québec is currently limited because of the absence of additional transmission
capacity.

NLH’s expert advisors have indicated that gaining wheeling rights for additional large amounts
of power through the province on the existing infrastructure could be possible in the future –
but challenging. Because Hydro-Québec participates in energy markets in the United States, it
is subject to that country’s Federal Energy Regulatory Commission transmission market rules—
including the requirement that HQ provide access on a non-discriminatory basis to market
participants. If NLH had a firm power delivery agreement with a customer in the United States
and an identified existing transmission route to deliver it (which included routing it through
Québec), it could submit a transmission booking request to HQ that would be governed by
these open access rules. In addition, the transmission service associated with HQ’s two 250
MW blocks (which expire in 2050 and 2060) will become available in those years and be
subject to open access transmission rules. This would enable NLH to request the transmission
rights if it elected to export a portion of the Churchill Falls power supply to markets in the
United States.

The IRC finds that future opportunities for NLH to export Churchill Falls power through Hydro-
Québec’s transmission system after 2041 are significant but complex and that they may be
catalyzed through commercial discussions with potential customers who are seeking long-term
power security.

The Labrador-Island Link (LIL) transmission line currently exports power from Muskrat Falls to
the island of Newfoundland and on to eastern Canada. Its capacity of 900 MW is not sufficient
to also accommodate significant power from Churchill Falls and the cost of constructing a
second LIL could be prohibitively costly (the final cost of the LIL was $5.8 billion).


29 Hydro-Québec states the amount of its exports on its website at https://www.hydroquebec.com/clean-energy-provider/


54                                                  Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

(h) whether the proposed governance structures and agreements,
ownership, equity participation and control mechanisms of
hydropower assets on the Churchill River and Gull Island and related
transmission projects ensure the province has control and is clearly
the principal beneficiary of the energy resources of the Churchill
River

The IRC has interpreted the “principal beneficiary” of the energy resources of the Churchill
River to mean that the province has access to sufficient amounts of power when needed in
order to create optimal economic and financial benefits.

NLH will remain the majority owner of CFLCo with 65.8% of equity, and the province will
thus obtain the majority of financial dividends resulting from the commercial operations of
CFLCo. Corporate governance arrangements for CFLCo are specified in the Shareholders’
Agreement which, absent a new agreement, will expire in 2041. Under the Shareholders’
Agreement, NLH appoints the majority of CFLCo’s board members, giving it majority control
through board decision-making. However, the CFLCo Shareholders’ Agreement provides HQ,
the minority shareholder, with special decision rights, giving HQ effective control over certain
major business matters of CFLCo, as discussed in the CF PPA section of this report. NLH and
HQ agreed in the MOU to “modernize” governance arrangements for CFLCo, leaving specific
terms to be determined in the Definitive Agreements. The IRC considers decisions about future
governance arrangements of CFLCo to be a critical consideration in future negotiations.

NLH will be the majority (60%) owner of the proposed Gull Island joint venture (GIJV)
corporation and thus will receive the majority of the financial dividends resulting from the
commercial operation of the GIJV. The MOU does not specify a corporate governance
structure for the GIJV but indicates that it will be based on the same principles as the agreed
modernized CFLCo governance structure. As discussed in the Gull Island section of this report,
the IRC considers that alternative ownership and control arrangements – besides the joint
venture model – for developing and operating Gull Island should be comprehensively evaluated
to ensure the province will be the long-run beneficiary.

NLH will be the 100% owner of the proposed transmission line within the province that
connects Gull Island to Québec’s transmission system and will be the sole beneficiary of the
financial returns on this asset.

The commercial terms of the PPAs in the MOU, which include proposed pricing mechanisms
for power and related payment terms and agreed volume allocations for NLH and HQ,
fundamentally determine the magnitudes of the forecast financial and economic benefits that
the province is forecast to attain. These are discussed in previous sections of the report.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     55

(i)   whether the pricing structures for both Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Corporation Limited and the Gull Island Joint Venture power and the
allocation of energy and capacity are consistent with the province
being the principal beneficiary of the energy resources of the
Churchill River

As the majority shareholder of CFLCo, NLH will receive 65.8% of the forecast financial
dividends arising from the new CF and CFX PPAs. Similarly, NLH as the majority shareholder of
the GIJV will receive 60% of dividend payments to shareholders arising from the GI PPA.

As discussed in previous sections of this report, there are significant limitations to the proposed
pricing and payment structures and other commercial arrangements for both the Churchill Falls
and Gull Island PPAs that reduce the financial benefits to the province and that create financial
risks.

Based upon the IRC’s research and analysis, the province will not be the main beneficiary of
the economic benefits stemming from Churchill River energy since most of the power under
the MOU will be exported outside the province rather than retained in-province for usage by
industrial customers. 70% or more of CF power and 90% or more of GI power will be sold to
HQ, so Québec has the opportunity to leverage this power for industrial development and
to gain the associated provincial economic benefits. This is likely to continue the constraint
in NL on industrial development under the 1969 CF PPA power allocations. As discussed
in the Economic Growth Benefits of Churchill River Power section in this report, economic
benefits are less predictable and certain than financial benefits and they require co-ordinated
government support. Whether the province wishes to become the principal beneficiary of the
economic benefits of the energy resources of the Churchill River is a strategic decision for the
government to consider in the context of a long-term economic development strategy.


(j)   whether the balance between capacity and energy production was
properly considered to ensure a reliable and cost-effective energy
system for the benefit of the people of the province

CFU and CFX are considered by NLH and HQ to be capacity projects that will be used primarily
to provide power on demand during periods when more power is needed rather than a way
to deliver a more continuous supply of baseload energy, which is the case for the existing
Churchill Falls plant and the proposed Gull Island plant. As such, CFU and CFX contribute
toward improved energy-system reliability. As the primary off-taker of power from Churchill
Falls, Hydro-Québec will be the main beneficiary of the new capacity and enhanced system
reliability that CFU and CFX provide. Additional capacity is particularly valuable to Hydro-
Québec during the winter season when power demand peaks in Québec.


56                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The actual costs of CFX and the budgeted costs of CFU will be recovered through an annual
toll paid (per MW-year) by the off-takers that will be independent of the incremental energy
produced by these projects. Costs of Gull Island will be recovered from off-takers through long-
term power purchase agreements that specify the pricing model. Hydro-Québec will be the
main off-taker, committing to purchase at least 90% of Gull Island energy production. As noted
by the IRC, the financial benefits to the province of the CFU and CFX projects are minimal, and
if financed on CFLCo’s balance sheet, will burden the company with debt.

From a reliability perspective, NLH and HQ have jointly studied potential hydraulic interactions
and operational impacts on the Churchill River and downstream facilities that would be
associated with CFU and CFX. An early hydraulic study identified that CFU and CFX would not
materially affect annual energy production at Muskrat Falls but that there could be seasonal
and operational impacts that require further detailed evaluation. Construction of the CFX
project, which is in close proximity to the existing CF facility (250 metres), involves complex
engineering and planning and exposes the CF plant to operational risks. NLH has reported to
the IRC that it is aware of the need to comprehensively identify and mitigate CFX risks, and
that the cost of mitigation could affect the economic viability of the project.


(k) whether appropriate consideration was given to how changes to the
Churchill River water management agreement will impact Muskrat
Falls operations and whether the compensation for any such impact is
fair and reasonable

NLH and HQ completed a joint study in 2022 to assess potential hydraulic interactions and
operational impacts on both the Churchill River and downstream facilities that would be
associated with the upgrade and expansion of the Churchill Falls facility. The study identified
key uncertainties and the need for further analysis of potential impacts—including how the
construction and operation of a facility at Gull Island would affect power production at Muskrat
Falls—and of mitigation options.

NLH identified through previous study work a significant reduction of flows at Muskrat Falls
during the impoundment of the Gull Island reservoir. This will limit Muskrat Falls’ ability to
generate energy during this period.

The MOU contains provisions to protect Muskrat Falls perpetually. Section (c) of the MOU’s
Schedule K (“Water Management Principles”) is intended to ensure that Muskrat Falls will have
sufficient water to reliably meet customer commitments and to comply with environmental
regulations. As well, in section 2.6 of the MOU, the parties agree to take into consideration
“customary provisions in the Definitive Agreements to account for such impacts on CF and
Muskrat Falls.”


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       57

The specific water management and compensation details required to achieve these provisions
remain to be negotiated by NLH and HQ.

The contemplated changes to and construction of the facilities operating upstream on the
Churchill River will affect the operation of Muskrat Falls. Until the Definitive Agreements are
complete, the IRC cannot determine if any compensation resulting from them will be fair and
reasonable, given that there will be some long-term impact on the downstream facilities.


(l)   whether the proposed contract duration specified for each of the
new Churchill Falls Power Purchase Agreements, the Churchill Falls
Expansion Power Purchase Agreements and the Gull Island Power
Purchase Agreements, and the duration of the Exclusivity Agreement,
are in the best long-term interest of the people of the province, and
in the alternative, what contract duration would be appropriate given
the current energy market dynamics

The proposed new Churchill Falls PPAs’ term (51 years) effectively extends the current
arrangements by about 34 years. Within the electricity sector, however, it is not uncommon
for PPAs to be shorter than 25 years (unless driven by financing needs). Given the difficulty
of making accurate long-term energy demand forecasts—particularly in light of uncertainties
around AI and data centres, electrification pathways, geopolitics/national security policy,
and emerging energy technologies—the IRC finds that a shorter contract term than what is
contemplated in the MOU would offer meaningful advantages.

Expert advisors for NLH have recommended aligning the PPA and amortization periods for
the CFX and GI projects. The IRC does not opine on whether 50-years or 65-years is the
appropriate length. With a shorter duration generally being preferred, the pricing model and
the amortization period should be aligned such that the asset has positive value in the market
at the end of the PPA term.

In the opinion of the IRC, the 15-year exclusivity period for GI is long compared to standard
industry practice, especially as it does not begin until 2029. A shorter period would be more
appropriate.


58                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

(m) whether sufficient contingency was included in the cost estimates for
the new developments and transmission assets to reflect increasing
costs of labour and materials

NLH advised the IRC that cost estimates for the new developments are preliminary Class 5
estimates and have not been agreed to by HQ. Class 5 is the concept-stage cost-estimation
classification with an accuracy probability (P-level) of between −50% and +100%. The final
report of the Muskrat Falls Inquiry included a recommendation that the province should not
undertake a large capital project with a P-level lower than 85% (which indicates a probability of
a cost over-run of no more than 15%).

The IRC concludes that until cost estimates for the new developments meet the required P85
level of confidence, it is not possible to determine whether contingencies will be sufficient.


(n) whether the proposed commercial terms and pricing mechanisms
provide adequate compensation to the province, as principal
beneficiary, and limit its exposure to acceptable levels of construction
and financial risk

As described before, the IRC has interpreted “the principal beneficiary” of provincial resources
to mean that the province has access to sufficient amounts of power when needed in order to
create optimal economic and financial benefits.

With respect to construction risk, Hydro-Québec will lead the design and construction of the
Gull Island project, with full decision-making authority through to its completion, as stated in
the MOU. If required, HQ will provide a completion guarantee. Current estimates for Gull Island
construction costs are between $15 billion and $25 billion (nominal). The project is expected to
be financed by 25% equity and 75% debt, amortized over 65 years. Total capital costs including
over-runs will be amortized over 65 years and will be passed on to the off-takers through the
cost-plus pricing mechanism. Approximately 23% of costs, including any over-runs, will need to
be recovered from subsequent off-takers as those costs are not recovered in the term of the
initial PPA. It is not certain that pricing in subsequent PPAs will allow for full cost recovery.

Hydro-Québec will lead the design and construction of the Churchill Falls Expansion project,
with an estimated cost of $4.6 billion (nominal), and have full decision-making authority. If
required, HQ will provide a completion guarantee. The expansion is expected to be financed
by CFLCo with 100% debt to be amortized over 65 years. The associated PPA has a term of 50
years, but the capital costs including over-runs will be amortized over 65 years. Approximately
23% of total project costs, including any over-runs, will not be paid by the off-takers through
the proposed cost-plus pricing mechanism in the initial PPA. The IRC was informed that


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     59

geotechnical and other technical issues could arise with CFX that would result in risks to
the existing CF plant. The technical and financial feasibility of CFX, including risk mitigation
measures, will need to be carefully evaluated before the project is sanctioned.

NLH will lead in the development of the NL transmission lines from Gull Island to the new HQ
delivery point, and from Gull Island to the existing Churchill Falls facility. The estimated project
cost is $3.6 billion (nominal), and NLH will wholly own the asset. NLH will be responsible
for all construction and financing risk. NLH will receive a usage payment calculated by the
regulated cost-of-service pricing model once Gull Island come into service, the terms of which
are to be negotiated. Any cost over-runs will be passed onto the off-takers, subject to terms
in the Definitive Agreements. In addition, to utilize the power allocated to NLH in the MOU,
an additional transmission line will be required from Churchill Falls to Labrador West. There
is a current proposal, not related to the MOU, involving NLH and a consortium of companies
to make capital contributions toward the construction of this transmission line, which has an
estimated construction cost of $2.5 billion.

Construction of the Churchill Falls Upgrades project will be led by either CFLCo or NLH,
estimated at $1.9 billion (nominal), and will be financed 100% by CFLCo debt. Any cost over-
runs will be shared by the shareholders based on their ownership percentages. If commissioning
is delayed, volume shortfalls will be absorbed 50/50 by the two firms, however NLH will bear a
disproportionate amount of construction risk (65.8% vs 34.2%).

In the IRC’s opinion, the province does not have full protection from construction cost over-
run risks for the Gull Island project, because of the mismatch in PPA and depreciation periods.
While HQ will be responsible for arranging financing, the debt will be incurred by the Gull
Island Joint Venture, the costs of which will be passed through to off-takers. Further, the
province, through NLH, will have financial risk associated with raising the capital required
to fund the construction costs of NL transmission assets and any over-runs for CFU, as the
province will need to borrow before revenues are generated by the projects.

As discussed in previous sections of this report on individual projects, there are financial risks
to the province arising from pricing complexities and deferred payments.


(o) whether the financial, economic and social value to the province
ensures current and future generations will be the principal
beneficiaries of the Churchill River resource

The Executive Summary and Conclusions sections of the report provide the IRC’s views on
whether the financial, economic and social value to the province of the MOU ensures current
and future generations will be the principal beneficiaries of the Churchill River resource. In
summary:


60                                           Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

With respect to the proposed Churchill Falls PPAs, the province will realize new economic and
financial benefits in the period leading up to 2041. After 2041, however, the limited availability
for NLH of additional power from Churchill Falls or the new development projects is likely to
restrict the province’s longer-term economic growth. Financial benefits are constrained by
complex and uncertain PPA pricing and by the deferral of payments under the contemplated
revenue structure. In addition, if NLH is unable to obtain transmission access through Québec
or alternative routes, the province’s ability to capture fair market value for Churchill Falls power
in external markets after 2041 will remain limited. Future governance arrangements for CFLCo
should ensure that the majority shareholder has the appropriate level of control and that
minority shareholder rights are protected.

The Churchill Falls Upgrades project is not expected to deliver meaningful direct financial
benefits to the province due to the proposed financing structure. It will, however, provide
modest economic benefits during construction. If the project places additional debt on CFLCo,
it introduces risk to the corporation and creates a lost opportunity for the province in the form
of reduced ability to extract additional dividends.

Similarly, the Churchill Falls Expansion project offers limited direct financial benefit to the
province, while generating economic benefits through construction activity. The project could
place a significant debt burden on CFLCo, increasing corporate risk and reducing dividend
capacity. In addition, the project features a mismatch between the amortization period and the
PPA term, such that full costs cannot be recovered within the PPA period. Construction activity
may introduce geotechnical risk to the existing Churchill Falls facility.

The Gull Island project will provide significant economic benefits through construction activity
and by expanding access to power that could support industrial development. However, the
financial benefits relative to the scale of the investment are modest. As structured, the project
raises several concerns, including the mismatch between amortization and PPA terms, the
inability to recover full costs over the initial PPA period, a development fee that appears low
relative to value, and structural issues related to ownership and governance.

Finally, the NLH transmission line project offers limited direct financial benefits but meaningful
economic benefits through construction. Relative to the amount of total new generation
contemplated in the development projects, there is a risk of transmission congestion that could
constrain NLH’s ability to move power beyond Québec into other external markets.

The IRC concludes that, despite providing financial and economic benefits, the MOU in
its current form is not in the best long-term interest of the people of the province. The
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador has the opportunity to work toward a revised
agreement with HQ that would serve the public interest.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                        61

Appendix 1 – Order Establishing the Inquiry


62                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee   63

64   Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee   65

66   Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee   67

68   Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee   69

Appendix 2 – Biographies of IRC Members

Chris Huskilson, FCAE, President and CEO of 5-H Holdings Inc (Chair)
An engineer by training, Mr. Huskilson was President and CEO of Algonquin Power and Utilities
Corp. from August 2023 until March 2025, during which time the company sold its renewables
business and transitioned into a fully regulated electricity, gas, and water utility.

Mr. Huskilson was President and CEO of Emera Inc for 14 years. During this period, the
business grew from $3 billion in assets to $30 billion and developed the Maritime Link, which
provides NLH with access to the maritime provinces’ electricity market.

In recent years, Mr. Huskilson has been very active in the Atlantic Canadian startup
ecosystem. He was a founding partner at CDL Atlantic, a founding member of Canada’s Ocean
Supercluster, a founding director of Endeavor Canada, and he has been a mentor and investor
in startup companies.

A life member of the Association of Professional Engineers of Nova Scotia and a Fellow of the
Canadian Academy of Engineering, Mr. Huskilson has served on many for-profit and not-for-
profit boards of directors. He is past-chair of the Canadian Electricity Association, past-chair of
the Greater Halifax Partnership, and past-chair of the Energy Council of Canada.

Among his honours are membership in the Nova Scotia Business Hall of Fame, being named the
Energy Person of the Year, receiving the Catalyst Canada Award for advancement of women in
the workplace and the F. H. Sexton Gold Medal for Engineering.

Mr. Huskilson holds a Bachelor of Science in Engineering, Master of Science in Engineering, and
Doctor of Science, Honoris Causa, from the University of New Brunswick.

Guy Holburn, PhD
Guy Holburn is Professor of Business, Economics and Public Policy at the Ivey Business School,
University of Western Ontario. His areas of expertise are corporate governance, regulation,
and business strategy, with a focus on the energy and utilities sectors. He has published widely
in peer-reviewed academic journals, and he has authored numerous reports on provincial and
federal energy policies.

Dr. Holburn is the founder and former Director of the Ivey Energy Policy and Management
Centre, Canada’s leading university-based centre for applied research on energy sector policy.
He is also a director of the board of London Hydro, a Canadian utility, a board member of the
Alliance for Research on Corporate Sustainability, and a member of the Council for Clean and
Reliable Energy.

Dr. Holburn has served as an expert consultant to corporations and governments in Canada
and the U.S. He has provided advice on corporate governance, merger strategy, economic


70                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

impact assessments, competition policy, electricity regulation, pipeline regulation, and regional
economic development strategy. He testified as an expert witness on utility regulation and
Crown corporation governance at the Muskrat Falls Inquiry in 2018 and 2019.

Holburn teaches both degree and executive development programs at Ivey Business School.
He holds a PhD and MA from the University of California, Berkeley, and a BA Hons. (First Class)
from Cambridge University. Previously, Holburn worked for several years as a management
consultant for Bain and Company in England and in South Africa, and for the California Public
Utilities Commission.

Michael Wilson, CA, FCA
During a professional career spanning more than 40 years, Mr. Wilson has served in several
leadership positions with the global professional services firm Ernst & Young, including
managing partner in St. John’s and senior partner in the Toronto office leadership group.

Mr. Wilson has prepared and/or reviewed a significant number of commercial contracts and
agreements relating to the formation of partnerships, joint ventures, and public offerings, and/
or related to the purchase and sale of specific assets, business units, commercial entities, as
well as examined related capital investments and various financing structures. He negotiated
and executed a significant number of complex, multi-jurisdictional, multi-entity contractual
agreements. He also completed numerous consulting contracts that included program
development and evaluation, capital budgeting, risk management, and forensic audits. He has
significant experience designing and deploying effective oversight mechanisms focused on
critical corporate functions and initiatives.

Mr. Wilson served clients from many economic sectors, including power and energy, oil and
gas, mining, technology, insurance, financial services, construction, fisheries, healthcare, and
transportation. In addition, he has provided consulting services to all three levels of government
(federal, provincial, and municipal), as well as to sovereign wealth funds and trade unions.

Mr. Wilson is also a veteran entrepreneur: he has owned and operated business ventures in
professional services, as well as the outfitting, cable, service, construction, and entertainment
industries.

A former president of both the St. John’s Board of Trade and Rotary Club of St. John’s East
(Paul Harris Fellow), Mr. Wilson is a former director of numerous not-for-profit and charity
organizations. He obtained his Chartered Accountant designation in 1978; in 2003 he was
awarded a Fellowship in recognition of his outstanding service to the profession and the
community.

Mr. Wilson retired from public practice with Ernst & Young in 2013; he continues to operate his
professional services firm.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                          71

Appendix 3 – Brief History of Churchill Falls
The Churchill Falls power generation facility is located on the Churchill River, which flows
through Labrador in a generally eastward direction from Ashuanipi Lake into Lake Melville,
where it empties into the Labrador Sea.30 At 856 kilometres, it is the longest river in Atlantic
Canada. Two hydroelectric facilities have been built on the Churchill River, at Churchill Falls
(fully operational in 1974) and Muskrat Falls (fully operational in 2023). Gull Island is the
location of a proposed third facility.


Source: GNL Department of Forestry, Agriculture and Lands


The existing Churchill Falls facility has a rated capacity of 5,428 MW, making it the second largest
underground hydroelectric facility in North America. Its 11-powerhouse turbine-generator units
were commissioned for full commercial operation between 1971 and 1974.


30 The sources for this section are the following court judgments involving CFLCo: Supreme Court of Canada, May 3, 1984,
June 9, 1988 and November 2, 2018; Newfoundland Court of Appeal, March 5, 1982 and October 25, 1985; Québec
Court of Appeal, August 1, 2016 and June 20, 2019; Québec Superior Court, July 24, 2014 and August 8, 2016.


72                                                   Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The facility’s assets also include transmission lines that take power to both Québec and parts of
Labrador, including Labrador West, Labrador East, and the local Churchill Falls area.

Water to power the generators comes from the Smallwood Reservoir, which has a surface area
of 6,527 km2 and is contained by rock-filled dykes. The Smallwood Reservoir is the fifth largest
in the world, when measured by surface area.

Milestones in the Development of Churchill Falls
The initial steps in the development of Churchill Falls occurred during the first dozen years after
1949, when Newfoundland joined the Canadian Confederation:

April 17, 1953        The British Newfoundland Corporation Limited (Brinco)
incorporates; the shareholders are a consortium of Canadian and
British investors led by N.M. Rothschild & Sons
May 20, 1953          The NL legislature passes a law authorizing Brinco to explore
and develop the hydroelectric resources of Labrador’s Hamilton
River (renamed the Churchill River in 1965)
June 30, 1958         Brinco assigns the rights granted to it in the May 1953 legislation
to Hamilton Falls Power Corporation Limited, a wholly owned
subsidiary of Brinco (later renamed Churchill Falls (Labrador)
Corporation Limited)
March 13, 1961        The NL legislature passes a law approving the issuance of a lease
to CFLCo
March 23, 1961        CFLCo makes a proposal to HQ for the development of the
Churchill Falls site
May 15, 1961          HQ rejects this proposal, stating it intends to pursue the
development of its own hydroelectric opportunities in Québec
May 16, 1961          A renewable 99-year lease is signed that gives CFLCo rights to
the exclusive use of the watershed of the Churchill Falls site for
the generation of hydroelectric power, as well as the right to
transmit power throughout NL, and to export power from NL

In 1965, negotiations between CFLCo and Hydro-Québec resumed, and on October 13, 1966,
the two parties signed a 21-page Letter of Intent to jointly develop the Churchill Falls site.

The Letter of Intent provided for a 40-year contract with an option to renew in favour of HQ,
with terms to be mutually agreed upon. CFLCo would construct the facility, and HQ would
build the transmission lines to Québec. The Letter of Intent also stipulated that HQ would


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                      73

be required to purchase in excess of 85% of the power produced by the facility during the
contract’s first 40 years. This power would be bought on a take or pay basis at fixed prices that
would decrease every five years, amounts to be calculated based on the cost of constructing
the facility. The Letter of Intent contained no escalation or reopener clause that would allow for
increasing HQ’s purchase price if market prices changed.

CFLCo began work at the construction site within 15 days after the Letter of Intent was signed.

During construction, the project costs increased unexpectedly. CFLCo was unable to obtain
necessary financing and, with Brinco unable to provide financial assistance, CFLCo edged close
to bankruptcy.

Meanwhile, in the lead-up to signing the final “Power Contract,” HQ required the addition of
new terms and conditions; these included a renewal clause of 25 years at the end of the 40-
year term at a reduced price of 2 mills per kilowatt hour (kWh)—lower than the price HQ would
be paying in the final years of the initial term.

Because of its precarious financial position, CFLCo accepted these requirements. In exchange,
HQ agreed to assume certain additional financial risks, including a guarantee of the payment of
cost over-runs for the project. It also injected $115 million into the project budget.

The HQ commissioners and the CFLCo board of directors approved the Power Contract in June
1968; it was signed almost a year later, on May 12, 1969. It stipulated that HQ would purchase
in excess of 85% of the power produced at the facility for 40 years beginning in 1976, when
construction was then scheduled to be completed, to be followed by an automatic renewal for
an additional 25 years: 2016 to August 31, 2041.

The fixed base rates for the initial 40-year term as outlined in the Power Contract (article 8.1)
were:

•   First 5 years   2.7734 mills per kWh

•   Next 5 years    2.7110 mills per kWh

•   Next 5 years    2.6591 mills per kWh

•   Next 10 years 2.5449 mills per kWh

•   Thereafter      2.3787 mills per kWh

In addition, these rates were to be adjusted by applying a mathematical formula that would be
based on the final capital cost of the project. That cost was eventually fixed at $900 million
by an agreement of the parties on December 21, 1987. HQ also agreed to provide additional


74                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

financial support for the project, including advancing funds to CFLCo to cover its loan
payments.

CFLCo was entitled to recapture 300 MW of power for provincial requirements under
the Power Contract, and an additional 225 MW to supply its subsidiary, Twin Falls Power
Corporation.

Both the CFLCo board of directors and the government of NL were fully aware of all the
negotiations and documents relating to the Power Contract before it was signed.

The nature of the Power Contract can be summarized simply: in exchange for the certainty
provided by a long-term, reliable purchaser of power, together with employment and other
economic benefits during the construction phase, CFLCo agreed to sell Churchill Falls power
to HQ at fixed prices over a period of 65 years (1969 to 2041), with no adjustment to reflect
inflation or operating cost increases.

The Guaranteed Winter Availability Contract
By the mid-1990s, CFLCo was in financial distress because the fixed pricing structure of the
power contract did not provide sufficient revenue to cover its operating expenses.

On June 18, 1999, CFLCo and HQ signed the “Guaranteed Winter Availability Contract”
(GWAC), which took effect retroactively to November 1, 1998. The GWAC provided urgently
required revenue to CFLCo for ongoing expenses, such as maintenance of the facility. Under
this contract, CFLCo agreed to provide HQ with 682 MW of additional power between
November and March every year until August 31, 2041, in exchange for substantial additional
revenue that would assure the corporation’s financial stability and enable it to pay dividends to
its shareholders.

The GWAC did not alter the terms of Power Contract. It was signed on June 18, 1999, the same
day the Shareholders’ Agreement was signed. The Shareholders’ Agreement gave HQ, CFLCo’s
minority shareholder, veto rights over certain important corporate decisions.

Early Initiatives to Develop Gull Island
In 1998, NL Premier Brian Tobin announced a plan to enter negotiations with Québec for the
development of a power generating plant at Gull Island, the expansion of the Churchill Falls
facility, and the construction of transmission lines in both provinces. These negotiations did not
result in an agreement.

In 2002, NL Premier Roger Grimes announced a non-binding agreement with Québec for a
hydro development at Gull Island. This initiative also did not result in an agreement.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                      75

NL’s Legal Initiatives to Obtain a Fair Price for Churchill Falls Power
In the early 1970s, the price of electricity increased significantly, partly because of a sudden
increase in crude oil prices following a 1973 oil embargo placed by some oil producing
countries. The situation shone a bright light on the fundamental problem with the Churchill
Falls Power Contract: the omission of any escalation or reopener clause through which the
price for power that HQ paid to CFLCo could be increased to reflect cost increases or market
pricing changes.

Beginning in 1976, the government of Newfoundland and Labrador mounted several initiatives
in the Courts with the objective of obtaining a more equitable share of the significant profits
(and other economic benefits) that HQ was receiving because of the terms in the Power
Contract.

The Recall Case
In August 1976, the NL government issued an Order in Council demanding that CFLCo supply
the province with an additional 800 MW of power, starting on October 1, 1983. CFLCo
refused, stating it could not comply because of the terms of the 1969 Power Contract and
financing obligations. The impasse was then referred to the Courts of both NL and Québec.

Ultimately, CFLCo’s right to refuse the government’s demand was upheld by the Supreme Court
of Canada in a judgment issued on June 9, 1988.

The Water Rights Reversion Case
In December 1980, The Upper Churchill Water Rights Reversion Act received Royal Assent
after passage by the NL legislature. The act’s purpose was to provide for the reversion to NL of
unencumbered ownership and control, in relation to the 1961 water rights lease to CFLCo.

In February 1981, Government referred the Reversion Act to the Court of Appeal of
Newfoundland and Labrador for an opinion on its constitutional validity. The Court of Appeal
decided that the Reversion Act was constitutionally valid legislation. The Supreme Court of
Canada disagreed, ruling that the pith and substance of the Reversion Act was to interfere
with the rights of HQ outside the territorial jurisdiction of NL and was, therefore, not
constitutionally valid legislation.

The Good Faith Case
On November 25, 2013, CFLCo filed a memorandum in the Québec Superior Court seeking
an Order that the Power Contract be renegotiated, specifically in a way that replaced the fixed
rate with a new and higher rate, on the basis that HQ had an ongoing duty to CFLCo to co-
operate and act in good faith with respect to the Power Contract.


76                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

CFLCo’s request was denied by the Québec Superior Court in 2014, by the Québec Court of
Appeal in 2016, and by the Supreme Court of Canada in 2018.

The 2016 Contract Renewal Case
The expiry date of the initial 40-year term of the Power Contract was August 31, 2016; the
start date of the 25-year automatic renewal term began the next day, on September 1, 2016.

CFLCo and HQ disagreed on the interpretation of several important clauses in the 1969 Power
Contract with respect to the 25-year renewal term. The CFLCo position was that there were
material changes in its obligations to supply power to HQ in the 25-year term. HQ’s position
was that there were no material changes. In July 2013, HQ asked the Québec Superior Court
for clarification, and the Superior Court accepted HQ’s position.

CFLCo appealed to the Québec Court of Appeal with partial success. In a June 20, 2019,
judgment, the Québec Court of Appeal decided that HQ was capped at an annual fixed amount
of power during the 25-year renewal term. In addition, and subject to certain qualifications,
CFLCo had the right to sell power in excess of the capped amount provided that it satisfied its
commitments to HQ.

This case was not appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.

Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited: Corporate Structure and Governance
Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited owns the existing hydroelectric facility at
Churchill Falls. Since November 7, 1975, CFLCo shares have been divided between two entities:
Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro (65.8%) and Hydro-Québec (34.2%). CFLCo is governed by
an eight-person board of directors, six of whom are appointed by NLH and two by HQ.

On June 18, 1999, NLH, HQ, and CFLCo signed a Shareholders’ Agreement that identifies
specific corporate decisions that require the approval of a “special majority” of the directors,
including at least one director nominated by NLH and one by HQ. The Shareholders’
Agreement also identifies specific corporate decisions that HQ has to approve in its capacity
as shareholder. These requirements have the practical effect of giving HQ veto power over
several kinds of important corporate decisions.

The Shareholders Agreement continues in force until whichever of the following occurs first:

•   NLH or HQ becomes the owner of all the CFLCo shares

•   HQ no longer owns any of the CFLCo shares

•   August 31, 2041 (when the existing contracts governing the sale of Churchill Falls power
expire)


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         77

Concurrent with the termination of the Shareholders’ Agreement, CFLCo’s By-Law 28 will
automatically come into force, provided that HQ is a shareholder at that time. Under By-
Law 28, the control that HQ is able to exercise under the Shareholders’ Agreement will be
substantially reduced. For example, HQ’s rights to appoint two directors is removed, as is the
“special majority” clause.

By-Law 28 will not restrict the ability of CFLCo to operate, maintain, improve, and sell power
and energy from the Churchill Falls facility. However, as long as HQ remains the owner of
more than 25% of the shares, certain important corporate decisions will continue to require its
approval.


78                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Appendix 4 – Discount Rate

In financial analyses of major projects such as those contemplated in the MOU, a key
consideration is the chosen discount rate. Briefly, the discount rate is analogous to the interest
rate and is used to convert future cash flows to their present value. The discount rate is
typically selected from within a range of reasonable values. NLH and HQ agreed to use a
discount rate of 5.822% for calculating financial benefits and costs in the MOU. At discount
rates higher than 5.822%, the price HQ pays for Churchill Falls power in the early years of the
MOU’s PPA would need to increase significantly in order to achieve the target PV of the project
($33.8 billion).

The agreed discount rate of 5.822% is the same as HQ’s weighted average cost of capital
(WACC), which is a common basis for selecting a discount rate. Hydro-Québec is Canada’s
largest electric utility—a provincially-owned public utility company that is a monopoly provider
of electricity to consumers in the province of Québec. The financial risk involved in its own
operations is covered by its regulated prices, which allows HQ access to low-cost debt and a
modest equity component. The WACC for HQ is calculated as follows:


During negotiations, expert advisors for NLH advised that 5.822% was within an acceptable
range based on a debt component of 10-year bond yields and an equity return of 9%. However,
alternative discount rates, such as those that utilize longer-term debt issuance costs, could be
considered to be reasonable; selecting a different discount rate can have significant impacts
on NPV calculations. NLH’s expert advisors indicated to the IRC that there is a lower volume
of transactions for longer-term debt issuances, making debt pricing more challenging, and that
they relied on an internal policy to use 10-year debt costs for calculating acceptable discount
rate ranges.

Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                     79

One of NLH’s expert advisors provided a response to the following question from the IRC
about the amount and cost of debt that CFLCo could obtain: “Assuming the Churchill Falls
expansion and upgrades were not financed using the CFLCo balance sheet, what is your
estimate for the quantity of debt that could be financed using a 5.822% cost of capital?”
Their response stated that they had explored alternative financing through 144a/RegS bond
issuances throughout the term of the PPA, and concluded:


Indicative debt issuances may exceed the funding capacity in a single
capital market, with the most likely financing strategy to involve a mix of
debt issuances in both the Canadian and U.S. debt markets. As such, for
modelling purposes, [we] assumed issuances of debt across 10, 15, and 20-
year tenors. Given the tenure of the [Churchill Falls] PPA, 10-, 15-, and 20-
year issuances are appropriate as they don’t face near-term recontracting
risk and deliver attractive pricing. Cost of debt for Churchill Falls, based on
the outlined debt financing strategy is currently estimated to be 5.50% on a
blended cost.

[The] indicative debt financing case assumes debt issuances based on new
CF PPA cash flows, with debt issuance based on a 1.50 [times] debt service
coverage ratio (DSCR) and all debt assumed to be amortized by end of the
CF PPA term in 2075. Total quantum of debt to be issued between 2025
and 2030 is estimated to be approximately $8 billion. These figures are
based on the current PPA framework we understand today.

[Expert’s] estimate for the quantity of debt that could be financed at
Churchill Falls (assuming CF Expansion and CF Upgrades are not financed
using CF(L)Co balance sheet) is a preliminary analysis based on the current
PPA framework to [the expert’s] understanding and is subject to change
based on market conditions at the time of debt issuances and credit rating,
amongst other factors.


The response above concludes: “Cost of debt for Churchill Falls, based on the outlined debt
financing strategy, is currently estimated to be 5.50% on a blended cost.”

Unlike HQ and NLH, CFLCo is not a regulated public utility— it is an independent power
producer (IPP), with geographically distant markets for its power that require transmission
access from third parties, including HQ. Normally an IPP is required to have sufficient equity
capital in order to reduce risk for debt providers and thus reduce the cost of debt. There is an
inverse relationship between the equity percentage of capital and the interest rate on the debt.


80                                         Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

At the end of 2025, CFLCo had 100% retained earnings (equity) on its balance sheet and no
long-term debt, which should make its current discount rate 9% (as per the formula above).

In the situation where CFLCo issues debt up to 70% of its balance sheet capacity, the WACC
for CFLCo is calculated to be 6.55%:


WACC = (Debt% x Debt Rate) + (Equity% x Equity Rate)

Debt %                           70%

Debt Rate                         5.50%

Equity%                           30%

Equity Rate                        9%

Calculated WACC                       6.55%


Additionally, if the debt component were reduced to 60%, and the equity component increased
to 40%, which is not uncommon for an IPP, the calculated discount rate becomes 6.9%.

Both of these higher discount rates are within the range that an IPP in the current North
American market would use for financing purposes. In fact, the discount rate for an IPP in the
current market for private investors would typically be 7% to 8% for a contracted plant.

Applying a higher discount rate than 5.822% leads to a lower present value of the forecast
annual payments from HQ for CF power than $33.8 billion. For example, at a discount rate of
6.9%, the present value would be $7.6 billion lower ($26.2 billion).


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       81

Appendix 5 – Levelized Cost of Electricity

The value of HQ’s payments for Churchill Falls power under the MOU’s proposed PPA ($33.8
billion in net present value 2024 dollars, $195 billion in nominal dollars as specified in Schedule G)
can be evaluated in terms of the levelized cost of energy (LCOE), which yields an average cents
per kWh amount.
The LCOE, a commonly used metric in the energy sector, is one way of comparing PPAs and
the costs of generating power over the lifetime of an asset. Conceptually, the LCOE is the
constant price per kWh at which a generating asset’s lifetime revenues would cover its lifetime
costs, discounted to present value. In other words, it is the breakeven energy price (in cents
per kWh) that a project would need to sell all its output at during its operating life to recover
financing, capital, and operating costs at an assumed discount rate. The formula for calculating
the LCOE is:


Variable         Meaning

N                Term of the PPA (in years)

n                A given year within the term

Cost of electricity in a given year
CFn
(n) in ¢

Quantity of electricity in a given
Qn
year (n) in kWh

d                Discount rate

Source: National Renewable Energy Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy. 2013. Power Purchase
Agreement Financial Models in SAM.


The IRC calculated the LCOE for HQ’s purchases of CF power as specified in the MOU and
also for several related variations in the pricing model, each using the MOU discount factor
of 5.822%. Annual CF volumes for HQ and NLH were obtained from the GNL OurChapter.ca
website. The results of the analysis are presented below in Table 4.


82                                             Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

The first row of the table shows that the price at which HQ purchases CF power is equivalent
to an LCOE of 7.9 ¢/kWh across the entire 51-years of its PPA. The nominal price ranges from
1.6 ¢/kWh in 2025 to 37.2 ¢/kWh in 2075. Applying the same analysis to the 2025-2041 period
gives an LCOE of 3.8 ¢/kWh and for the 2042 to 2075 period, 16.7 ¢/kWh (rows 2 and 3).

The fourth row calculates the LCOE for NLH’s purchases of CF power. The LCOE is
10.5 ¢/kWh, which is higher than HQ’s average LCOE because NLH’s volumes are increasing
over the term of the PPA (and HQ’s are decreasing) and because nominal prices are higher in
the later years.

The fifth row provides the LCOE for an alternative “5.9 ¢/kWh effective price” model which
was used by NLH after the MOU was signed to publicly explain the new CF PPA pricing. In this
model, the price of CF power is hypothetically set at 5.9 ¢/kWh in 2025 and then increases
by 2% each year thereafter. The NPV (in 2024 dollars) is $33.8 billion and hence is equivalent
in real NPV terms to the Schedule G model. However, total nominal payments would be
approximately $70 billion lower than those generated by Schedule G. The LCOE for this
“5.9 ¢/kWh effective price” model is 7.9 ¢/kWh, identical to the MOU Schedule G pricing
model LCOE.

The sixth row of the table calculates the LCOE if the effective price in 2025 is instead set at
4.1 ¢/kWh and escalated at 4.1% each year thereafter. This percentage is the average rate of
electricity price inflation in Canada over the last 50 years. This model also yields a net present
value of $33.8 billion and an LCOE of 7.9 ¢/kWh. Nominal prices range from 4.1 ¢/kWh in
2025 to 30.3 ¢/kWh in 2075.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       83

Table 4 – Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis of New Churchill Falls PPA

Energy               Nominal              Total             Present          Levelized
(GWh from            Energy Price         Nominal           Value of         Cost of
2025 -2075)          Range                Payments          Payments         Energy
Pricing Model                                 (cents per           (Revenue)         ($ billion,      (cents per
kWh, 2025-           ($ billion)       2024)            kWh)
2075)

MOU Schedule G
1,267,587           1.6 to 37.2           $194.7            $33.8               7.9¢
(HQ, 2025-2075)*

MOU Schedule G
460,955             1.6 to 7.8            $19.8             $11.0             3.8¢
(HQ, 2025-2041)


MOU Schedule G
806,632            8.2 to 37.2           $174.9            $22.8              16.7¢
(HQ, 2042-2075)

MOU Schedule G
442,953            1.6 to 37.2            $83.3             $12.1             10.5¢
equivalent (NLH)
“5.9 ¢/kWh
Effective Price”            1,267,587           5.9 to 15.9           $125.1            $33.8               7.9¢
(HQ)**
“4.1 ¢/kWh
Effective Price”            1,267,587           4.1 to 30.3           $159.4            $33.8               7.9¢
(HQ)***

* The nominal value of HQ and NLH new CF PPA payments is $278 billion ($194.7 + $83.3).
** The nominal value of HQ and NLH new CF PPA payments is $208.4 billion ($125.1 + $83.3).
*** The nominal value of HQ and NLH new CF PPA payments is $242.7 billion ($159.4 + $83.3).
Note: the value of the denominator in the LCOE formula is 428,773 in each of the 51-year models in Table 4 except for the
NLH pricing model where the value is 115,173.


84                                                    Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Appendix 6 – Estimated Rate Mitigation Costs

The IRC concluded that rate mitigation costs could have a material impact on the forecast
benefits of the MOU to the provincial treasury and, in the opinion of the IRC, should be
included in the evaluation of financial benefits. NLH excluded estimates of rate mitigation
costs post-2041 from their analyses due to uncertainty over future government rate mitigation
policy. The IRC made the following assumptions in its calculations:


Key Assumptions
1. All industrial, residential, and general customer rates are mitigated.31

2. To be conservative, the IRC calculated rate mitigation to a forecast rate of 4.5 ¢/kWh in
2025, escalating at 2% per annum, for all customers.

3. Rate mitigation costs are calculated for the period from 2036 to 2075.

4. For simplicity, rate mitigation costs are not included for 360 MW of power from Gull
Island and new developments.

In these calculations, the IRC is not recommending an industrial rate policy but estimating a
potential cost of rate mitigation for the NLH PPAs, which the IRC considers to be conservative.
Estimated rate mitigation costs have been identified transparently throughout the report.

Under these assumptions, the total cost of rate mitigation from 2036-2075 is estimated to be
$5.4 billion (2024 dollars).


31 https://www.ourchapter.ca/files/NewfoundlandLabrador-Quebec-MOU-Briefing-Deck-Dec-12-2024.pdf


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                         85

Glossary of Terms
Amortization
An accounting method for recovering the costs of an intangible asset over a number of years.

Back-Loading
A financial structure where debt repayments or cash flows are moved towards the end of the
term of a contract.

Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT)
A BOT is a specific form of commercial arrangement where an entity builds and operates
an infrastructure project until the end of a defined period of time and then transfers full
ownership to another entity at the end of the contract term.

Capacity
The maximum power that a generating unit, generating plant, or other electrical apparatus can
supply. Common units for measuring capacity include kilowatt (kW) and megawatt (MW).

Capacity Factor
A ratio of an electrical generating plant’s actual output over a period of time compared to its
potential output if it were possible for it to continuously operate at full capacity over the same
period of time.

Cost-of-Service Pricing Model
A regulatory framework in utility pricing that determines rates charged to customers on the
basis of the utility recovering the total costs of providing a service, including depreciation,
infrastructure, operation, maintenance and administrative costs, and a reasonable return of and
on equity.

Depreciation
An accounting method for recovering the costs of a tangible asset over a number of years.

Discount Rate
The percentage rate used to convert future cash flows to their present value.

Dispatchable Power Generation
Sources of electricity that can be used on demand at the request of power grid operators,
according to market needs. Dispatchable power generators can be turned on or off within
specific time frames, or can adjust their output according to an order.


86                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Energy
The amount of electricity an electrical generating plant produces over a specified period of
time.

Equity
Equity represents the value of shareholders’ investment in a corporation.

Fair Value
The price that an asset, product, or service that is agreed in an orderly transaction between a
knowledgeable buyer and seller at arm’s length.

Fair Market Value
The price that an asset, product, or service sells for in an open, unrestricted market between a
knowledgeable buyer and seller at arm’s length.

Generator
A device that converts rotational energy to electrical energy.

Generating Plant
An industrial plant for the generation of electric power.

Gigawatt Hour (GWh)
One million kilowatt hours.

Kilowatt (kW)
One thousand watts. The commercial unit of measurement of electric power. A kilowatt is the
flow of electricity required to light ten 100-watt light bulbs.

Kilowatt Hour (kWh)
One thousand watts used for a period of one hour. The basic unit of measurement of electric
energy. The average electrically heated home on the island of Newfoundland consumes about
18,200 kWh per year.

Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
A calculation for measuring the average cost of electrical generation over the lifetime of an
energy-producing asset or power purchase agreement.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                        87

Megawatt
One million watts, or one thousand kilowatts. A unit commonly used to measure both the
capacity of a generation plant.

Nominal Payments
The actual dollar amount of a payment received in a year.

Net Present Value (NPV)
The value today of a future sum of all discounted cash flows (both incoming and outgoing)
associated with a project or investment, given a specified discount rate.

Off-Taker
A purchaser under a Power Purchase Agreement.

P-estimate
The statistical confidence level of achieving specific cost and schedule forecasts for a project.
For example, a cost estimate with a P-value of 85 (P85) has an 85% chance the predicted cost
will be achieved.

Participation Agreement
A contractual arrangement that establishes the terms and conditions under which parties agree
to participate in a project, defining rights, obligations, governance, decision making, financing,
risk allocation, and how the output of the project would be shared.

Powerhouse
The structure that contains the turbines and generators of a power project.

Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)
A contract between an electricity producer and a purchaser under which the purchaser agrees
to buy electricity for a period of time.

Present Value (PV)
The value today of a future sum of money or stream of payments, given a specified discount
rate.

Principal Beneficiary
In the context of the energy resources of the Churchill River, the IRC has interpreted “principal
beneficiary” to mean that the province has access to sufficient amounts of power when needed
in order to create optimal economic and financial benefits.


88                                          Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee

Public-Private Partnerships (PPP or P3)
A co-operative agreement in which the private sector designs, finances, builds, operates, and/
or maintains a public asset or service while the government or Crown corporation retains
oversight, and ensures that public and commercial objectives are met.

Rate Mitigation
A government policy to subsidize or financially restructure electricity rates for ratepayers.

Recapture Block (or Recall Block)
The right for NLH to obtain additional power allocations from Churchill Falls at specified dates.

Under the 1969 Power Contract, CFLCo was entitled to recall 300 MW, and an additional 225
MW for its subsidiary, Twin Falls Power Corporation.

Under the MOU, NLH is entitled to recall an additional 605 MW before 2041, and an additional
500 MW after 2041.

Residual Value
The remaining value, positive or negative, of an asset or agreement at a specified time.

Royalty
A payment made by company to a resource owner for the right to extract, sell, or use
resources.

Sanction
A decision point at which a project’s scope, budget and schedule are formally authorized.

Terawatt Hours (TWh)
A unit of bulk energy; one billion kilowatt hours.

Volume Blocks
A defined amount of capacity or energy to be sold.

Water Management
A Water Management Agreement defines how the flow of water on a river with hydro-
generation plants is to be managed and co-ordinated in order to maximize the production of
electrical power on that river.


Report by the Churchill River Independent Review Committee                                       89
