Acadiensis: Journal of the History of the Atlantic Region

Smallwood, Churchill Falls, and the Power Corridor through Quebec
Author(s): JAMES P. FEEHAN
Source: Acadiensis, Vol. 40, No. 2 (SUMMER/AUTUMN-ÉTÉ/AUTOMNE 2011), pp. 112-127
Published by: Acadiensis: Journal of the History of the Atlantic Region
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41803321
Accessed: 23-08-2018 15:13 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Acadiensis: Journal of the History of the Atlantic Region is collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Acadiensis

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood, Churchill Falls, and the
Power Corridor through Quebec
THE PERSISTENT ANIMOSITY IN NEWFOUNDLAND towards Quebec over
the 1969 Churchill Falls contract is well known.1 That contract is between Hydro-

Quebec and the Churchill Falls Labrador Corporation (CFLCo); the former is a
Quebec Crown corporation and the latter was a private sector entity at the time (but
has been under Newfoundland government majority ownership since 1974). What is

involved is the sale by CFLCo of a huge amount of electricity to Hydro-Quebec
under increasingly onerous terms until 2041 . But this essay is not about those terms.2

Rather, it is about one theory that has been put forward to explain why those terms

turned out to be so one-sided. Specifically, there is a general perception in
Newfoundland that the federal government failed the province by not intervening to
permit the transmission of electricity from Churchill Falls across Quebec to markets
elsewhere.

This indictment of the federal government has surfaced in a number of forums.
In an extensive study, for instance, of the evolution of federal government electricity

policy and its relationship to the Churchill Falls negotiations during the 1960s, Jason
Churchill concluded: "The Newfoundland government was unable to convince the
federal government to invoke relevant sections of the British North America Act
(BNA Act) to secure access through Quebec territory."3 In 2003, Newfoundland's
provincial Royal Commission on Renewing and Strengthening Our Place in Canada
agreed with that perspective. In its final report, the commission stated:

The federal government placed Hydro-Québec in a monopolistic
position during the Churchill Falls negotiations of the 1960s by not
enacting legislation that would have allowed for a power corridor

through Québec. Without such legislation, negotiations on the
Churchill Falls project took place in a situation in which virtually

all of the power and energy had to be sold to Hydro-Québec.
Consequently, it was in a position to dictate a low price, an
insignificant recall of power for use in Newfoundland and Labrador
and an unprecedented time frame (65 years) governing the power
contract.4

1 Herein "Newfoundland" refers to the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador. I am grateful to
Melvin Baker, Douglas M. Brown, Christopher Dunn, Stephen Tomblin, and three anonymous
referees for helpful comments. Any errors or omissions remain my responsibility solely.
2 For a recent perspective in that regard, see James P. Feehan and Melvin Baker, "The Renewal
Clause in the Churchill Falls Contract," Dalhousie Law Journal 30, no.l (Spring 2007): 207-57 .

3 Jason L. Churchill, "Pragmatic Federalism: The Politics Behind the 1969 Churchill Falls
Contract," Newfoundland Studies 15, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 215.
4 Report of the Royal Commission on Renewing and Strengthening Our Place in Canada (St.
John's, NL: The Queen's Printer, 2003), 123.

James P. Feehan, "Smallwood, Churchill Falls, and the Power Corridor through

Quebec," Acadiensis XL, no. 2 (Summer/Autumn 2011): 112-27.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood, Churchill Falls , and Quebec 113
Additionally, there is a long-standing belief that during the 1960s a planned
Newfoundland government request to the federal government for a power corridor
was thwarted by a personal appeal from Canada's prime minister not to do so for the
good of national unity. Former premier Danny Williams put it as follows: "At the
time of the Upper Churchill contract, the Prime Minister of the day told our Premier
that the price of doing otherwise could have been civil unrest in Quebec. Sounds
extreme. But the reality is that we made the sacrifice for the sake of national unity."5

Given the significance of the Churchill Falls contract in both Newfoundland's
recent history and its political landscape, and considering the substantial amount of

archival material that is available, it is surprising that there has been so little
scholarly research on the validity of these claims of federal government complicity.
That research void was the impetus for this paper. To that end, this research note
addresses two key questions. First, did the Newfoundland government ever call for
federal intervention under the constitution? Secondly, did the prime minister of
Canada actually undercut such a request?

Background and context
Due to the efforts of Premier J.R. (Joey) Smallwood, during the early 1950s a group
of major financial and industrial interests formed a consortium known as the British

Newfoundland Corporation (Brinco).6 Smallwood had lobbied in the United
Kingdom for such a group to be the catalyst for economic development in
Newfoundland. At the time Newfoundland, like Quebec, had a province-building
agenda - albeit with different strategies. The former sought from outside what it

lacked internally - expertise and capital - whereas the latter drew from the
indigenous strength of the Quiet Revolution, which provided new Québécois

political leadership, technical expertise, and institutions.
As incentives, Brinco received extensive land and mineral rights. One asset with

great hydro-electric potential was the waterfalls on the upper portion of the

Churchill River, known as the Hamilton River at the time. The falls were located in

the then very isolated and unpopulated western Labrador region of the province. The
cost of developing that hydro-electric project was so huge that Brinco would need a
customer willing to make a long-term commitment to purchase a substantial amount
of the energy before the project was built. Otherwise, lenders would not be willing
to provide financing. Initially, there were three main possibilities: exporting to
Ontario, exporting to Quebec, or selling to the energy-intensive aluminum industry.7
These were explored in the early-to-late 1950s, but little progress was made.

In 1958, Brinco created CFLCo as a subsidiary. It was 80 per cent owned by

Brinco while Quebec-based Shawinigan Engineering Company held the remaining

20 per cent. CFLCo's mandate was to develop Churchill Falls. CFLCo officials
generally held positions in Brinco as well, so references to either are generally
interchangeable. CFLCo made efforts to attract Hydro-Quebec as a buyer, and in

5 Premier Danny Williams, Speech to the Economic Club of Toronto, 3 May 2007,
www .releases .gov .nl .ca/releases/speeches/2007/premiermay 3 .htm .

6 A far more extensive and detailed account is available in Philip Smith, Brinco: The Story of
Churchill Falls (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1975).
7 Smith, Brinco , 64.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

114 Acadiensis

1961 the latter did consider an offer but opted for development of a new sou
within Quebec. However, new possibilities arose the following year. In Septem

1962, in the speech from the throne, the federal government announced that it woul

permit long-term contracts for exports of electricity from Canada. This was
encourage major power projects that were too large for domestic markets to abs
For CFLCo and Small wood this new federal export policy was welcome new
made the United States market an option for the first time, and the Consolid
Edison Company of New York was soon found to be interested.
Based on these new prospects, CFLCo and Hydro-Quebec discussed various sal
configurations. One early idea was for CFLCo to build a transmission line thro
Quebec to New York State. Electricity in excess of Quebec's needs would be
under long-term contract to Consolidated Edison, a rental fee for the route wou
paid to Quebec, and Quebec would have an option to purchase the transmission

Smallwood discussed this approach with Quebec Premier Jean Lesage on
December 1962, and emphasized that Quebec would "remain the boss" over

transmission line within its borders.8 Smallwood was, therefore, seeking Queb
approval for crossing that province with the transmission line. He was far fro
presuming an automatic right-of-way, was not demanding one, and was me
suggesting a means of development that Lesage might find attractive.9

In January 1963, Lesage indicated his preferred approach at a meeting w

Brinco chairman H. Greville Smith. He told Smith that he wanted Hydro-Queb
to buy the power at the provincial border and re-sell any surplus.10 The Queb
premier publicly reiterated his position in the Quebec legislature on 30 April 1

He stated that Hydro-Quebec would buy all the power at the Newfoundl
Quebec border, and export whatever amount of it was surplus to Quebec
needs." Apparently, Smallwood and the Brinco/CFLCo leadership were agre
to this approach. In August 1963, the president of Hydro-Quebec, Jean-Cla
Lessard, told A.W. Southam, Brinco's president, that Lesage was convinced
Smallwood and others had "firmly agreed that Hydro-Quebec would alone

with Con. Ed. and other potential purchasers of power surplus to Quebec's nee
Lessard went on to suggest that this would not be a problem for CFLCo as lon

Hydro-Quebec paid CFLCo in enough US dollars to allow it to meet its US

obligations arising from the project. Southam replied to Lessard: "I w

personally be surprised if this problem developed into a stumbling block.

Implicit in this arrangement was the notion that Hydro-Quebec would build, o
and operate the transmission lines from the border across Quebec. That was m

8 Smith, Brinco, 151.

9 Lesage did not make any commitment at that meeting with Smallwood. Smith, in Brinco (151
suggests that this was because 1 1 days later, on 29 December, Lesage would be announcing
nationalization of all private electricity companies in Quebec and the take-over of Shawini
interest in CFLCo.

10 "Note on Discussion between Premier Lesage and H. Greville Smith, Quebec City - January
29th, 1963," Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro Corporation Records, GY-116, Premier of
Quebec, 1963, vol. VI, The Rooms Provincial Archives Division (TRPAD).
11 Smith, Brinco, 157.

12 "Note by A WS on a talk with J-C Lessard on Tuesday 6 August 1963," CFLCo Papers, MG 28,
III, vol. 37, file 8, Library and Archives Canada (LAC).

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood , Churchill Falls , and Quebec 115

explicit in early September 1963 in Clause 12 of CFLCo's first presentation of a
draft proposed letter of intent to Hydro-Quebec.13
Talks on finalizing the letter of intent would take more than three years, and they

turned out to be very difficult negotiations. They were also complicated by politics.

One such problem was Smallwood's anger over the decision by the Quebec

government to compel Shawinigan Engineering to sell its shares in CFLCo as part
of that province's 1962 nationalization plan for its private electricity utilities; those
shares were vested with Hydro-Quebec. Another touchy political matter was the
border between Newfoundland and Quebec in the Labrador Peninsula; suggestions
by Lesage to link changes in that boundary to the letter of intent created very public
problems between him and Smallwood from time to time.14 Finally, Hydro-Quebec

was required to have Quebec government authorization before it could sign any

agreement. This brought the Quebec premier closely into the commercial

negotiations and thus politicized the process for Hydro-Quebec more so than for

CFLCo, which was not a Crown corporation and did not need Newfoundland
authorization to sign an agreement.
The search for alternatives

In July 1964 the negotiations came to a particularly difficult impasse. The price of
electricity was the key problem. CFLCo could not bring its price down to what was
being demanded. At the same time, the two premiers were on poor terms. On 13
April 1963 Smallwood was questioned in the provincial legislature about whether he
had had discussions with Quebec about the border. He replied that an exchange of
territory had been discussed, but insisted that it was "no more than a thought" and
that he had told Lesage that this matter and the Churchill Falls development were
separate matters.15 Then, on 23 April in the Quebec legislature, Lesage announced

that he expected to soon present a resolution on a territorial exchange. No such
resolution was ever presented, but the whole episode was embarrassing for
Smallwood and further worsened the relationship with Lesage.16

Considering the political situation and the commercial terms demanded by
Hydro-Quebec, Brinco determined that the conditions needed to reach an agreement
did not exist. It decided that other alternatives should be explored and that, in light
of interest expressed by Ontario Hydro and the continuing interest of Consolidated
Edison, there should be "an attempt to secure permission to transmit the power

13 "Proposal by Hamilton Falls Power Corporation Limited to the Quebec Hydro-Electric
Commission" (draft of 3 September 1963), CFLCo Papers, MG 28, III 73, vol. 37, file 2.04.003,
LAC. Note that CFLCo was initially known as the Hamilton Falls Power Corporation, but the
name was changed when the Hamilton River was renamed the Churchill River.
14 At one point the idea was to swap portions of southern Labrador for Quebec territory adjacent to
northern Labrador. This border issue turned nasty at times, with the two premiers trading barbs
through the media. Smith, in Brinco , provides extensive background on the timing and nature of
those clashes.

15 "Smallwood-Lesage Talks: May Swap Territory With Quebec," Moncton Daily Times , 14 April
1964.

16 Debates of the Quebec Legislative Assembly, 3rd-Session, 27th Legislature, Wednesday, 8 July
1964, vol.1 , no. 103, p. 4523, CFLCo Papers, MG 28, III, 73, vol. 37, file 2.04.003, LAC.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

116 Acadiensis

across the Province of Quebec."17 Negotiations on a sale agreement with Hydr

Quebec were considered to be at an end. Any talks now would be limited

obtaining a route through Quebec.
At this time Brinco's chairman and chief executive officer was Robert Win
who had been a Liberal cabinet minister in the 1950s. Following Brinco's decisi
to explore other alternatives, he wrote to his former Liberal Party colleague and
prime minister, Lester Pearson, in order to give an update on the situation. Win
confirmed that negotiations had ended and mentioned the possible alternative

transmitting power through Quebec, either with Hydro-Quebec building

operating the line under contract or with CFLCo building its own line, or goin
around Quebec entirely. Winters made no formal request and his letter closed
saying that he would welcome a chance to discuss any suggestions that Pea
might have as to how to proceed.18
The next month two of Brinco's directors met with Lesage to review the situa
and gauge his position. When they asked him about the possibility of a right-ofthrough Quebec, Lesage "replied very emphatically that he would never agree to
a proposal."19 This response appears to be inconsistent with the Section 92.10(a) o
British North America Act of 1867, now known as the Constitution Act, 1867.
states that in any province, the federal government has jurisdiction over "Lin

Steam or other Ships, Railways, Canals, Telegraphs, and other Works

Undertakings connecting the Province with any other or others of the Province

extending beyond the Limits of the Province." Yet, Lesage's refusal to agree to a righ

of-way through his province was hardly vacuous. He also had constitutional card
play. Under Section 92.13 of the Constitution Act, property rights within a prov
fall under provincial jurisdiction. Thus, at the practical level, without the Que
government agreeing to use its power of expropriation it would have likely b
impossible or prohibitively expensive for CFLCo to acquire all the land needed fo
transmission lines. Additionally, Quebec's position at the time was that electri

transmission was under provincial jurisdiction.21 Indeed, in the early 1960s the feder

government had not exerted its authority with respect to interprovincial power
and provincial governments did dominate the field. The National Energy Board (
had only been created by the federal government in 1959, at which time the NEB
had been "deliberately designed to avoid the assertion of inter-provincial contro
electricity by the Board, because of provincial susceptibilities."22

17 "Minutes of the Thirty-ninth Meeting of the Board of Directors of Brinco," 15 July 1964, C

Papers, MG 28, III, 73, vol. 37, p. 6, LAC.
18 Robert Winters to L.B. Pearson ("Personal"), 29 July 1964, Robert Winters Papers, MG 32
LAC.

19 "Memorandum of a Meeting between Premier Lesage and Messrs Bourget and Monast at
Prime Minister's Office, On Thursday, 27th of August 1964," CFLCo Papers, MG 28, III, 73,

37, file 2.04.003, LAC.
20 Canada, Department of Justice, A Consolidation of The Constitution Acts 1867 to 1982 (Ottawa,
ON: Supply and Services Canada, 1983), 32.
21 Churchill, "Pragmatic Federalism," 224.
22 R.G. Robertson, "Memorandum for the Prime Minister, Action by the Federal Government with
regard to electric power," 15 January 1965, Lester Pearson Papers, MG 26, N3, vol. 206, file 558.1
Conf., p. 1 , LAC.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood , Churchill Falls , and Quebec 117
Despite this jurisdictional ambiguity, the federal government did possess a tool to
settle the matter. It was Section 92.10 (c) of the Constitution Act, which gives the
Parliament of Canada the authority to override provincial governments in areas of
exclusive provincial jurisdiction when it comes to "Such Works as, although wholly
situate within the Province, are before or after their Execution declared by the
Parliament of Canada to be for the general Advantage of Canada or for the Advantage
of Two or more of the Provinces."23 The use of Parliament's declaratory power in an
area that had been conceded to the provinces up to that time, however, would likely
have angered a number of provincial governments and particularly provoked Quebec.
Still, it was an option to which the federal government was not totally blind. In May
of 1964, the clerk of the Privy Council advised Pearson that in any effort to help
resolve the Churchill Falls impasse he should not refer to constitutional action, not
even to say that the federal government did not intend to use it, because the mention
of it might be interpreted as an implicit threat by Quebec and because the government

might have to turn to it "as a last resort and therefore should not be given away in
advance."24 And, around this time, the federal government was also doing some related

technical investigation. Specifically, following a discussion between the chairman of

the NEB and the federal minister of Trade and Commerce, the NEB studied the
economic and engineering feasibility of the federal government developing the

Churchill Falls project itself in a possible scenario where 92.10(c) was invoked.25
Where did Smallwood stand in all of this? According to Philip Smith in Brinco : The
Story of Churchill Falls , the negotiations were deteriorating during the spring of 1964
and Brinco's Robert Winters had a conversation with federal Minister of Finance Walter

Gordon.26 Gordon said that as an agreement had become more unlikely, he expected
that Brinco might have proposed that the federal government build the line across
Quebec and buy the power from Brinco. Winters replied by saying Quebecers would
never tolerate such action and that this was an impractical approach. More interestingly,

Winters recounted that conversation to Smallwood who responded by dismissing the
idea entirely, telling Winters that he would be opposed to such action in Quebec just as

he would if it were contemplated for Newfoundland.27 This view is consistent with
Smallwood's memoirs in which he writes: "Property and civil rights, under Canada's
written constitution, are of exclusive provincial jurisdiction. Accordingly, Quebec
would be within its rights to forbid the use of its soil for a transmission line."28

23 Department of Justice, Consolidation of The Constitution Acts , 32.

24 R.G. Robertson, "Memorandum for the Prime Minister: Hamilton Falls," 26 May 1964, Lester
Pearson Papers, MG 26, N3, vol. 80, file 3.31 .2.02 Winters, LAC.
25 The letter concluded that federal government development of the project appeared to be feasible
in terms of engineering and economics. See R. Howland, vice-chairman of the NEB, to Mitchell
Sharp, federal minister of Trade and Commerce, "Development of Churchill (Hamilton) Falls as

a Federal Government Project," 25 May 1965, RG20, Department of Trade and Commerce,
Mitchell Sharp, vol. 1525, file Development of Hamilton Falls, LAC.
26 Gordon was familiar with the negotiations. Earlier in the year. Winters had written him to
advocate for the exemption of CFLCo from federal corporate tax so that a lower price could be
offered to Hydro-Quebec; see Robert Winters to Walter Gordon, 12 February 1964, Walter
Gordon Papers, MG 32, B44, vol. 21 , Taxation, 1963-65, LAC.
27 Smith, Brinco, 183.

28 Joseph R. Smallwood, / Chose Canada: The Memoirs of the Honourable Joseph R. " Joey "
Smallwood (Toronto: Macmillan of Canada, 1973), 454.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

118 Acadiensis

Nevertheless, Small wood bitterly resented Quebec's refusal to allow any power
from Churchill Falls to be transmitted across that province for sale to customers
elsewhere.29 He had a solution, but it did not involve the use of Parliament's

declaratory power. It was an entirely different approach. Small wood strongly
advocated that Quebec territory be bypassed altogether. To that end, he favoured the
so-called Anglo-Saxon or Maritime route, which would use subsea cables to deliver

power to the island of Newfoundland and then to the Maritimes Provinces and
subsequently to the US northeast. As negotiations dragged on, and probably also
motivated by the boundary issues raised by Lesage, Smallwood's government and
Brinco funded a preliminary study of this option. Its results were encouraging
enough for the Newfoundland government to pay for a more extensive investigation

and, by May of 1964, Small wood was making public statements about the
attractiveness of the Maritime route.30 Over the remaining months of 1964,
Smallwood continued to push this alternative and was quite explicit about his
resentment of Quebec. In one interview, he stated that Newfoundland was now free,

"having escaped the clutches of Quebec," and went on to say that he viewed
Lesage 's proposals for a sale of power to Quebec "with contempt" and ruled out any
negotiations with Quebec.31 As he put it to Edmund de Rothschild, Brinco's deputy
chairman, only if this alternate route proved impractical would he "crawl on his
belly" back to Quebec.32
By early 1965, it was clear that Smallwood's cherished Maritime route was not
practical. It was technologically feasible but uneconomic.33 Brinco/CFLCo ruled it
out and refocused on either going through Quebec or pursuing a sale agreement with
Hydro-Quebec. The federal government was sounded out about possible relief from
federal corporate income tax, and attempts were made to reconcile Smallwood with

the idea of dealing with Quebec. With respect to the latter, with Smallwood's
agreement, in February Winters began quietly assessing Quebec's willingness to
discuss allowing power across its territory for sale elsewhere.34 In addition to
Winters 's attempts to bring Smallwood on side, the federal government came into
the picture. On 26 February 1965, Smallwood met in Ottawa with Prime Minister

Pearson and two federal cabinet ministers, Walter Gordon and Jack Pickersgill
(whose parliamentary seat was in Newfoundland). In his daybook, Smallwood wrote

29 Smallwood did not place much importance on whether CFLCo would actually own the
transmission lines. This was because he recognized that the Quebec government could always
expropriate them.

30 "Smallwood Says Cable Feasible," Montreal Star , 12 May 1964.
31 "Hydro Line in Spring Joey Says," Montreal Star , 28 November 1964.
32 "Memorandum of a meeting with J.R. Smallwood," attached to Edmund de Rothschild to Robert
Winters, 26 October 1964, Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro Corporation Records, GY113,

Premier 1964, TRP AD.
33 "Review of pertinent considerations on alternates for the development of Hamilton Falls Power,"

January 1965, CFLCo Papers, MG 28, III, 73, vol. 46, file 12.400.201 , LAC.
34 Winters assured Smallwood that he would act "informally and with the utmost delicacy," and
would avoid making direct overtures to the Quebec government; see Robert Winters to Hon. J.R.
Smallwood, 3 February 1965, Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collection 285, file 14.06.105, Centre

for Newfoundland Studies Archive at Queen Elizabeth II Library, Memorial University of
Newfoundland (CNSA).

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood , Churchill Falls , and Quebec 119

that during the meeting Pearson and Gordon told him that Canada was anxious to
see the development of Churchill Falls. Smallwood's memoir and daybook do not
mention any discussion of the use of Parliament's declaratory power at that time, but
he does record that the next day he phoned Winters to come to St. John's for talks.35
On 10 March, following Smallwood's invitation, Winters met with Smallwood
and his cabinet and argued for a return to negotiations with Hydro-Quebec.36 After
that meeting, Smallwood announced in the House of Assembly that Brinco and the
provincial government were in agreement. In his statement Smallwood said that
there would be transmission to the island part of the province, but he did not mention

a link to the Maritimes. He simply said that Brinco would investigate the most
economic way of transmitting power to other provinces. Thus, without admitting it
explicitly, Smallwood was no longer ruling out a Quebec deal. Accordingly, on 1

May 1965, Winters made a proposal to Hydro-Quebec to return to negotiations
based on either an arrangement to sell all of the power through Quebec if it did not

want to purchase any of it or a direct sale agreement in which CFLCo would be
allowed to transmit some power across Quebec for sale to other customers.37
While Hydro-Quebec and CFLCo negotiated, the month of May was fraught with

very public disagreements between Lesage and Smallwood. Smallwood had

announced publicly that a new deal would entail sales to customers other than
Quebec, but Lesage countered this. He asserted that Quebec would never permit
anyone to build a transmission line or let others transport electricity from Churchill
Falls through Quebec. Speaking to the media, the Quebec premier put his position
as follows: "The absolute first condition since the beginning of negotiations, and this
has never changed, is that Hydro-Quebec shall become the owner of all electricity
from Churchill Falls that travels through the Province of Quebec at its entry point
into the Province of Quebec. We will negotiate on no other ground than this."38 It is

worthwhile to note, however, that this position was inconsistent with the
Constitution Act. In particular, Section 121 states "All Articles of the Growth,
Produce, or Manufacture of any one of the Provinces shall, from and after the Union,
be admitted free into each of the other Provinces."39 Instead, Lesage was asserting
that if there was a transmission line in place to the border then Churchill Falls power
would not be admitted free into Quebec; it had to be sold to Hydro-Quebec.40

35 Smallwood, I Chose Canada , 461 .
36 Technically, Winters did not need the permission of the Newfoundland government to return to
negotiations; but there would have been enormous practical difficulties in proceeding without

Smallwood's approval. The project was in Newfoundland and subject to its provincial laws. At
times, Smallwood had even threatened Brinco with expropriation; see Smallwood, / Chose
Canada , 467.

37 Robert Winters to The President and Commissioners, Quebec Hydro-Electric Power Commission,
1 May 1965, Supreme Court of Newfoundland, Court of Appeal, 1983 no. 120, Record Submitted
on Behalf of the Second Defendant-Respondent, Quebec-Hydro Electric Commission, vol. I, tab
25, pp. 206-9.
38 "Brinco Seizure by Smallwood Quebec Rumor," Globe and Mail , 5 May 1965.
39 Department of Justice, Consolidation of The Constitution Acts , 43.
40 Following the breakdown in negotiations in 1964, Winters pointed out to Pearson that Lesage s
position was contrary to Section 121; see Robert Winters to L.B. Pearson, 10 September 1964,
Lester Pearson Papers, MG 26, N3, vol. 80, file 3.13.2.02, LAC.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

120 Acadiensis

Lesage's statement was also much to the chagrin of Small wood, who understood
that Winters's re-opening of negotiations with Hydro-Quebec was based on th
principle that CFLCo would be permitted to transmit some power through Quebec

for sale to customers elsewhere. Small wood was further aggravated some days later
when Lesage stated publicly that he wanted an exchange of territory before he would

authorize any final commercial agreement; Smallwood responded that he woul

never tolerate any change to the provincial border.41
Everything came very close to breaking down in mid-May. On 14 May Winters
wrote to Smallwood, advising him that an agreement was near. Winters also informe
Smallwood that Lesage would be telephoning him in a few days; the implied topic wa
the border. The Newfoundland premier immediately replied with a lengthy and very

angry letter in which he chided Winters for deviating from Smallwood's ow
understanding of Brinco's negotiating position. Smallwood's letter went on to denounce

Lesage's recent public statements, making clear that Lesage should not contact him.42
Prospects were bleak at this point, but a flurry of activity followed. Winters

immediately telephoned Smallwood to allay his fears of a sell-out. The next da
Lesage made a phone call to Smallwood, a call that the Newfoundland premier

described as conciliatory.43 Thereafter, more communications followed involving
these and other players, including federal cabinet ministers. Everyone gave ground.

Lesage agreed to back off on the border issue; it was replaced with the idea of

allowing Quebec some access to the headwaters of some rivers.44 Winters reassure
Smallwood that CFLCo's profits and Newfoundland revenues and other interests
were not being sacrificed in the new arrangements.45 Smallwood accepted the notion
of a sale of all the power at the border, which made the issue of Lesage's conflict
with Section 121 moot. Additionally, the federal government provided a financial

incentive; it agreed to make corporate income tax concessions that would allow

CFLCo to offer an even lower price to Hydro-Quebec.
With a consensus taking shape, Smallwood met with Lesage on 7 June and then
proceeded to Ottawa for a meeting with Pearson. He informed the prime minister
that all was agreed. In consultation with Pearson and Pickersgill, Smallwood wrote
a letter to Pearson to confirm that everything had been resolved.46 Smallwood's
letter was dated 7 June 1965 47 The next day, probably reflecting more harmoniou

41 "Labrador Land Trade Holds Key," Montreal Star , 13 May 1965.

42 J.R. Smallwood to Robert Winters, 15 May 1965, Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro
Corporation Records, GY-1 13, Premier 1964-66, TRPAD.

43 Smallwood, / Chose Canada , 463.

44 The five rivers in question have their headwaters in southern Labrador but flow south through
Quebec's North Shore. To develop their hydro-electric potential, Hydro-Quebec needed access to
the headwaters. Ultimately, there was no formal agreement on this matter. The issue appears to
have receded as negotiations moved from the letter of intent to a final contract.
45 Smallwood's concern was that if Hydro-Quebec took all the power then it would be able to sell
whatever was surplus to its needs to other markets at a substantial profit. Smallwood wanted

CFLCo to share in that profit because Newfoundland revenues from Churchill Falls were

proportional to CFLCo's profits.
46 Smallwood, I Chose Canada , 464.
47 J.R. Smallwood to prime minister, 7 June 1965, Lester Pearson Papers, MG 26, N3, vol. 205, file
552, LAC.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood, Churchill Falls , and Quebec 121
relations at the commercial level, Hydro-Quebec sent a complete draft of a letter of
intent to Brinco for consideration.48 In July the federal government announced there
would be tax rebate for private electric utilities, which was the tax policy change that

Brinco had advocated for CFLCo. Thus, by the summer of 1965, the political
conflicts appeared resolved and the commercial negotiations looked promising.
It is important to emphasize that throughout the acrimony of the preceding 14
months or so, the Newfoundland government had made no request for the use of

Parliament's declaratory power. The idea of doing so seems to have been far

removed from Small wood's thinking during this time. Throughout this period and
earlier, he had not been shy in making public comments about the project, Quebec,
Brinco, the border, exports beyond Quebec, Quebec cabinet ministers such as René

Lévesque, the Maritime route, and Lesage, but he made no mention of the
declaratory power.49 His reaction to Winters 's conversation with Gordon about
approaching the federal government to build a line across Quebec, and his opinion
about provincial jurisdiction over property rights, imply that Smallwood did not see
that approach as having any merit at the time. The next year, however, things
changed.

The Smallwood gambit
Despite the positive atmosphere of June 1965, negotiations to finalize an agreement
on the letter of intent went slowly. This made Smallwood impatient. In January of

1966, according to notes made in his daybook, Smallwood told Winters that he
would consider provincial nationalization of the Churchill Falls project if another
year was to be lost.50 However, by April 1966 Hydro-Quebec and CFLCo had a letter
of intent agreement. Hydro-Quebec strongly supported the agreement, but Lesage
decided to delay authorizing it until that year's provincial election was over. That
election took place in June; Lesage lost to the Union Nationale, and Daniel Johnson
became premier. On 6 July, Hydro-Quebec's Jean-Claude Lessard asked the newly
elected government for permission to proceed. Two weeks later, he wrote again and,
after highlighting the substantial benefits to Quebec of the agreement, he urged

Johnson to allow Hydro-Quebec to sign as soon as possible.51 Instead, the new
government decided to institute its own review process.

This additional delay provided Lesage, now the opposition leader, with the
opportunity to attack Johnson. At the end of August, Lesage criticized the
government for its procrastination and indecision. He warned the provincial

48 J.-C. Lessard to M.F. Nicholson, vice-president and general manager of Brinco, both the 21 -page

draft dated 31 May 1965 and a covering letter dated 8 June 1965, Supreme Court of
Newfoundland, Court of Appeal, 1983 no. 120, Record Submitted on Behalf of the Second
Defendant-Respondent, Quebec-Hydro Electric Commission, vol. I, tab 32, pp. 257-78.
49 Hugh Whalen, formerly of Memorial University's Department of Political Science, kept an
extensive private collection of press clippings from a cross-section of Canadian newspapers
dealing with Churchill Falls that appeared from 1964 to 1969. A large number contain remarks by
Smallwood, but in none does he even hint at the use of the declaratory power.
50 Smallwood, I Chose Canada , 465.
51 J.-C. Lessard to Premier Daniel Johnson, 22 July 1966, Supreme Court of Newfoundland, Court

of Appeal, 1983 no. 120, Record Submitted on Behalf of the Second Defendant-Respondent,
Quebec-Hydro Electric Commission, vol. II, tab 48, pp. 529-35.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

122 Acadiensis

government that unless it could make a decision, the federal government might
intervene. In an interview with the Globe and Mail newspaper, Lesage explicitly
referred to the possibility of federal intervention contained within Section 92.10(c
and said that he always had this in the back of his mind in regard to the project. H
also went on to state that neither Pearson nor Smallwood had ever suggested the
possibility of such federal intervention.52
This whole delay had further frustrated Smallwood, and he, too, now saw a use
for Section 92.10(c). On 13 September 1966 his cabinet passed an order-in-council
to authorize him to make a formal request to the federal government to declare th
project "to be in the national interest and to take such action as may be necessary t

enable such development to be commenced without delay" if the Quebe

government did not authorize Hydro-Quebec to sign the letter of intent by 2
September.53 Once the order-in-council was passed, Smallwood phoned Donal

McParland, CFLCo's president and CEO, to tell him of this development

McParland was now the key negotiator for the project as Winters had returned t

federal politics in late 1965. He told Smallwood that he would get word of
Smallwood's deadline to Johnson.54 Thus, Smallwood was using the threat o

constitutional confrontation to add to the pressure on Johnson to authorize the lette
of intent.55

Despite the trigger date of 22 September, Smallwood did not make any request
to the federal government at that time. It was not until 28 September, one day before

he was to leave the country on a vacation to destinations in Asia, that Smallwood
drafted - but did not send - his request letter to Pearson. In it, he wrote that an
agreement was not possible and went on to make the following specific appeal:

The Government of Newfoundland requests the Government of
Canada to invoke Paragraph (c) of Clause 10 of Section 92 of the

British North America Act. If the Government of Canada would

proceed forthwith to build a transmission line from Churchill Falls
to a point where it would tie in with power grids in Eastern Canada
it would ensure an immediate start on the construction of the
Churchill Falls power project itself.56
There is little doubt that if the federal government had asked Parliament to make

such a declaration, it would have been seen in Quebec - especially at a time of
growing nationalism there - as highly provocative. Some other provinces, too,

would have been alarmed at, and opposed to, such heavy-handed use by the federal

52 "Urges Quebec Decision, Ottawa may move in on Brinco deal: Lesage," Globe and Mail , 1
September 1966.

53 Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, Executive Council, Order-in-Council 661- 66, 13th

September 1966.
54 Daybook of J.R. Smallwood, 13 September 1966, Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collection 075,
CNSA.

55 Roland Grioux, an advisor to Johnson, warned McParland that if any word of Smallwood's orde
in-council leaked out then it would ruin the deal; see Smith, Brinco , 246.
56 J.R. Smallwood to L.B. Pearson (unsigned and undated), Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collect
075, file 3.10.061, CNSA.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood , Churchill Falls , and Quebec 123

government of its constitutional powers. A serious federal-provincial conflict would
have likely ensued, and perhaps the matter would have been brought before the

Supreme Court of Canada. These possible scenarios alone would surely have
deterred the federal government from concluding that acting on Smallwood's
request would be to the general advantage of Canada. Additionally, Section 92.10(c)
requires an explicit declaration by Parliament.57 At the time, Pearson led a minority

government and almost half of his Liberal members in the House of Commons

represented ridings in Quebec.
In any case, Smallwood's letter was never sent. Why it was never sent has been
a matter of some historical ambiguity, but there is enough evidence to clear that up.58

According to one explanation, the Smallwood letter was never sent because Pearson
asked Smallwood not to do so. This account was reported in 1996 by Cabot Martin,
a former policy advisor to Newfoundland Premier Brian Peckford during the 1980s.
It stems from a visit Martin made to Smallwood in October 1984. Smallwood was

retired by that time, and his provincial Liberal Party government had been replaced

by the Progressive Conservative Party in 1972. Martin met with Smallwood

following the ruling by the Supreme Court of Canada that Newfoundland's Water
Rights Reversion Act, which was an attempt to overturn the Churchill Falls contract,
was ultra vires. He asked the former premier why he had not delivered the formal
request to the federal government to intervene.
Smallwood's answer, as recounted by Martin, starts with him being in Montreal,
driving from there to Ottawa by car with his letter, and then meeting Pearson and
two unnamed cabinet ministers. Martin reports that, according to Smallwood, at the
start of the meeting, the prime minister said:

Joe, I know why you are here and if you ask me I'll have to say yes,
otherwise we would not really have a country. But I'm asking you
not to ask me because we will not be able to keep the towers up.
Martin's account then returns to his discussion with Smallwood and continues:

Joey paused, then looked at me as if to ask, "What would you
have done?" and said, "So I didn't ask him."
After the shock passed, I could only sympathize. Today, it's easy
to say Joey should have demanded that Mr. Pearson discharge his
responsibility to protect Newfoundland and remind him that he
couldn't run a country on fear and threats.
But back in 1966, the bombs in Quebec had started exploding
even while Canada still saw itself as the "peaceable kingdom." The

War Measures Act had not yet conditioned us to accept the

possibility of using force to combat violence. Can Newfoundlanders
fault Joey for refusing the mantle of national leadership that Mr.

Pearson wouldn't wear?

57 Peter Hogg, Constitutional Law of Canada, student ed. (Toronto: Thomson Carswell, 2004), 561 .
58 Churchill, in "Pragmatic Federalism" (231-2), dutifully reports the two different explanations for
why the letter was never sent, but does not attempt to determine whether either explanation is valid.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

124 Acadiensis

And he concludes as follows:

From what Joey told me, Newfoundland had greatly weakened its
Upper Churchill position in response to a solemn request from the
prime minister of Canada.
Joey did it in the interests of national unity, while Quebec flouted

the most basic rules of a federation. Doesn't fairness and the
national interest count for anything at all?59

The preceding account of events puts the federal government in a particularly bad
light. It implies that Pearson believed Smallwood was in the right but still pleaded with

Smallwood not to ask for action under Section 92.10(c). The picture of Smallwood
backing down, sacrificing Newfoundland's interest for the sake of national unity, is
striking political imagery. It is accepted as fact by many people and it continues to
influence Newfoundland's view of federal governments and the province's place in
Canada. For instance, in a tributary volume on Smallwood, William Callahan, a former
Smallwood cabinet minister and loyalist, echoes this story of a last-minute appeal from

Pearson and states that there has been no federal compensation to Newfoundland for
having protected Canada from "total disintegration."60
There is another explanation, however, for why Smallwood's letter to Pearson was
never delivered. According to Philip Smith in Brinco, Smallwood traveled to Montreal

on 29 September. He telephoned the CFLCo office in Montreal and left a message
asking for a meeting. In response, three senior officials from Brinco and CFLCo met
with Smallwood, who also had an entourage of three. It took place early that evening
at Smallwood's suite at the Holiday Inn on Sherbrooke Street in Montreal. The premier
read the letter to his visitors and threatened to send it, but they were successful in
convincing him to hold off - arguing that their information was that the Quebec
government's decision would be made by 6 October. Smallwood agreed, but warned
them that if the Quebec government did not decide by 7 October then "Churchill Falls
would be taken out of the hands of Brinco and Quebec and would become a national

project." Smith further reports that, in spite of some political opposition, Johnson
announced on 6 October that the Quebec government had authorized Hydro-Quebec
to sign the letter of intent. When a Time magazine reporter asked Smallwood for a
reaction, he replied "Glory Allelujah!"61 In his daybook, he wrote "Praise be to God!"62

This account of events and those reported by Martin are clearly at odds. In one,
Smallwood went to Ottawa to see Pearson and was asked to acquiesce for the good
of Canada, whereas in the other there is no such meeting and Smallwood succeeded
in using his threat as a tactic to get what he and both CFLCo and Hydro-Quebec
wanted. As it turns out, there is substantial corroborating evidence in favour of one
of these accounts and no such evidence for the other.

59 Cabot Martin, "Footnote to History: The Truth Behind Churchill Falls," Globe and Mail, 23
November 1996, reprinted in The Sunday Telegram (St. John's). 8 December 1996.
60 William R. Callahan, Joseph Roberts Smallwood: Journalist, Premier, Newfoundland Patriot (St.
John's, NL: Flanker Press, 2003), 64-5.
61 Smith, Brinco, 246-9.

62 Daybook of J.R. Smallwood, 7 October 1966, Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collection 285, file
1.10.006, CNSA.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood , Churchill Falls , and Quebec 125
It never happened
A good starting point is Smallwood's own daybook in which he made handwritten
notes of the day's events. According to the entry for 28 September, he drafted his
letter to Pearson. He records that he then phoned Jack Pickersgill, the Newfoundland
representative in the federal cabinet, and read it to him. His last entry for the day was

"Hope I don't have to send it!" 63 The next day Smallwood was in Corner Brook, on
Newfoundland's west coast, where he opened a new shopping centre at 11 am and
then met with a harbour development committee.64 Later in the day, he flew to
Montreal. His hand-written account of the remainder of the day is as follows:

Holiday Inn - Henry Borden, Val Duncan, McParland. Told me
details of Johnson's cabinet meeting - Johnson sent me a message.
Wants me wait til 6 th. I agreed.
Phoned JWP and told him.

LRC OLV ARL and I left by BO AC 1 1 pm for London.65
JWP refers to Pickersgill, and LRC, OLV and ARL are the initials of Smallwood's

associates: Leslie Curtis, O.L. Vardy, and Arthur Lundrigan. Henry Borden was

chairman of Brinco at the time and Val Duncan was a member of its board of directors.

The preceding excerpt is in accord with Smith's account of that meeting. It is also

consistent with the recollections of events given by Borden in his personal
memoirs.66 Yet, one might speculate that Smallwood could have changed his mind
after the meeting, reneged on what he had just agreed to, and decided to go see
Pearson with his letter. But doing so would seem to have been self-defeating. He had
just been assured that Quebec authorization of the letter of intent was only days

away, and Smallwood wanted that to happen. If it became known that he had
requested federal intervention, then the subsequent political ramifications in Quebec
would have made authorization much less likely. Still, his account to Martin implies

that this is what he did. But did he?

The available evidence supports the hypothesis that Smallwood did not take his
letter to Pearson and that there was no meeting between them on that day. First, there

was practically no opportunity for a meeting. Smith places Smallwood and his
entourage in Montreal at the Sherbrooke Street Holiday Inn in the early evening of
29 September, and the premier's own daybook notes that his flight from Montreal to
the UK left at 11 pm.67 Once the meeting with Borden and the others was over, that
left very little time to arrange a car and make a return drive to Ottawa. He would
also have had to locate and set up an evening meeting with Pearson. Any discussion
between them would have to have been extremely brief in order to allow enough

63 Daybook of J.R. Smallwood, 28 September 1966, Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collection 285,
file 1.10.006, CNSA.

64 Reports from the Corner Brook newspaper, The Western Star , 30 September 1966, confirm
Smallwood's activities in Corner Brook on that day.
65 Daybook of J.R. Smallwood, 29 September 1966, Joseph R. Smallwood Papers, Collection 285,

file 1.10.006, CNSA.
66 Henry Borden, Recollections , Henry Borden Papers, MG 30, A86, vol. 4, p. 166, LAC.

67 Smith, Brinco, 246.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

126 Acadiensìs

time for Smallwood to drive to the Montreal airport for his 1 1 pm flight departure

that took him out of Canada until 1 8 October.68

Not only was there practically no opportunity for a meeting, but there is also
more compelling evidence: Smallwood's daybook and Pearson's appointment book.
The contents of both do not jibe with there being a Smallwood-Pearson rendezvous.
In his daybook Smallwood's entries for 29 September included the meeting with
Borden, Duncan, and McParland in Montreal, the phone call to Pickersgill, and even
the departure time and airline for his flight out of the country, but there is no entry

for something as significant as a meeting with the prime minister. Also, in his own
memoirs, Smallwood recalled the Montreal meeting with Borden and his agreement
not to send the letter, giving an account that is consistent with Smith's. In addition,
his memoirs even admit that his letter was a threat that would be "more effectual

than the reality."69 Then there is Pearson's appointment book. Its one-page agenda
for 29 September lists his meetings and appointments from 9:45 am until 7:30 pm,
at which time he was to attend a dinner hosted by the US Ambassador.70 Nowhere is

there an item to do with Smallwood.

In sum, Smallwood drafted his letter to Pearson on 28 September, was in
Newfoundland until the afternoon of the next day, and arrived in Montreal later that
day for a flight out of the country in the evening. In the short time that he was in
Montreal he met with Brinco officials, leaving practically no opportunity for a return

trip to Ottawa for a meeting with Pearson. Neither Smallwood's daybook nor
Pearson's appointment book recorded any contact between the two men. There is no
corroborating evidence that a meeting took place, and such a meeting at that time
would have been contrary to Smallwood's interests. The logical conclusion is that it
never happened. Smallwood's letter was never sent, but not because of a national
unity appeal from Pearson. Rather, it was not sent because the Quebec government
authorized the letter of intent, which is what Smallwood wanted.71
Aftermath

The letter of intent was signed on 13 October 1966. It was a comprehensive and
extensive document that took a form very similar to a contract. Once signed, the
notion of a power corridor or right-of-way through Quebec ceased to be relevant
and, in order to deliver power according to Hydro-Quebec's needs, substantial work
on the Churchill Falls development began almost immediately.
Yet it was not until May of 1969 that the definitive contract was signed. During
the time in between there were extensive negotiations on the contract as well as

68 Daybook of J.R. Smallwood, 18 October 1966, Joseph Smallwood Papers, Collection 285, file

1. 10.006, CNSA.
69 Smallwood, I Chose Canada , 468.

70 Appointment Book, July-December 1966, Lester Pearson Papers, MG 26, N8, vol. 6, LAC.
71 It seems odd that the "Pearson Appeal" account has gained such widespread acceptance, given
that it was based on a private conversation that took place about 18 years after the fact. In
reporting that conversation, another 12 years later, Martin stated that he believed what Smallwood
had told him but, to his credit, suggested that it should be checked, and pointed out there must be

evidence in federal memos and Smallwood's own papers. Until now that fact-checking had not
been done. One might speculate that the readiness of many Newfoundlanders to believe that those
events took place reflected frustration with how the province was faring in the federation.

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Smallwood, Churchill Falls , and Quebec 127
intertwined financial arrangements. It was at this stage that the most controversial

aspects of the contract and related financial arrangements came about (i.e., an
automatic 25-year renewal contract with a reduced price was added to the term that
had been agreed to in the letter of intent, and mechanisms were put in place that
could allow Hydro-Quebec to take over ownership of CFLCo if certain milestones
were not achieved). Feehan and Baker argue that Hydro-Quebec took advantage of
CFLCo's financial circumstances in 1968 in order to obtain these concessions,
especially the extraordinary renewal clause.72 However, that debate is beyond the

scope of this essay. It suffices here to point out that neither CFLCo nor the
Newfoundland government ever reverted to the idea of a power corridor for

Churchill Falls power during the negotiations after October 1966. 73

Summary and conclusion
The matter of a power corridor is part of the history of the Churchill Falls contract. It

was especially relevant during the breakdown in negotiations in 1964. In response to
inquiries from Brinco at the time, Quebec premier Lesage indicated that he would
never agree to a right-of-way and that all power had to be sold to Hydro-Quebec at
the border - a position he had taken consistently and publicly throughout his entire
time in office. Thus the option of a power corridor, even in the form of permission to

sell some power across Quebec, was denied to CFLCo by Quebec and not the federal
government. There is no corroborating evidence that at the time the Newfoundland

government ever tried to convince the federal government to use Parliament's
declaratory power to create a power corridor through Quebec. Newfoundland made
no formal request for a parliamentary declaration that would allow the federal
government to take over the project, nor would such a request have obligated the
federal government to act, and there is no evidence that Smallwood, as much as he
resented Lesage's position, ever seriously contemplated such action. In September
1966, Smallwood did threaten to make such a request to the federal government.
However, that was a short-lived tactic. He used the threat of a request to pressure the
Quebec government to agree to Hydro-Quebec's request that it authorize the letter of
intent. Finally, and very importantly, there is the story that Pearson asked Smallwood,
for the good of Canada, not to request the federal government to seek a parliamentary

declaration. Despite its powerful imagery and its on-going influence on

Newfoundland political culture, that story is no more than a legend.
JAMES P. FEEHAN

72 Feehan and Baker, "The Renewal Clause."

73 This observation does not apply to the possible transmission of electricity from the potential
projects at Gull Island and Muskrat Falls on the lower portion of the Churchill River. It is well
known that there have been disagreements between the two provinces for decades in this regard,
and at times the Newfoundland government has appealed to the federal government to strengthen

provisions for interprovincial transmission of electricity; see Karl Froschauer, White Gold:
Hydroelectric Power In Canada (Vancouver: UBC Press, 1999). As of 2010, disagreements were
still in play; see, for example, the Newfoundland governments press release, "Quebec's Refusal
of Transmission Access Once Again Demonstrates Its Arrogance and Discriminatory Business
Practices ," www .releases .gov .nl .ca/releases/20 1 0/exec/05 1 2n09 .htm .

This content downloaded from 99.253.56.188 on Thu, 23 Aug 2018 15:13:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

