MOU'S SOCIETAL VALUES
Dr. Doug May

Claudine Bouchard, CEO, Hydro-Québec:
"This is a commercial agreement that we made, not a political agreement."
Remarks to reporters after a Chamber of Commerce of Metropolitan Montreal event (Nov. 19, 2025), as reported by CBC.

The projected prices for existing power from Churchill Falls in the MOU unlock only a slight increase in short- and medium-term economic value for Newfoundland and Labrador. Still, they are far below any potential market value. Hydro-Québec users will experience a decrease in economic value. Still, the price of power in Quebec remains far below market value, and this economic advantage to Quebec would be extended for another 34 years. As for the security of supply that Quebec seeks from the MOU, it receives that in the extended contract for existing power, obtains additional supply at an unknown price and with an unknown contract period, and is primarily financed by the debt of a small, debt-challenged province.

For Quebec, it is a commercial contract which serves a societal purpose and, by doing so, becomes an internal political agreement. For Newfoundland and Labrador, the MOU is a political agreement between provinces that is a poorly formulated commercial document, which has short-term and some medium economic value, but potentially at a longer-term cost.

===== OVERVIEW =====

Hydro-Quebec (HQ) and Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro (NLH) are both public utilities (Crown Corporations) whose primary purpose is to produce and distribute electricity, a necessity, to the indigenous peoples, residents, businesses, non-profit organizations, and public entities. HQ and NLH ultimately serve societal values and not commercial ones.

Value in this sense is the one Mark Carney deals with, in detail, in his book, Value(s). When the former Government of Newfoundland and Labrador stated that the MOU partnership "will create (a) significant and immediate increase in value for Newfoundland and Labrador", value should have been defined in societal terms, not commercial terms. We can explain increases in value by meaning increases in well-being.

===== INCREASES IN PRICES FOR EXISTING POWER IN THE MOU =====

CURRENT PRICES:

The prices are for electricity exported by the Churchill Falls (Labrador) Corporation Limited (CF(L)Co) to Hydro-Quebec. CF(L)Co is 34.2% owned by HQ.

The base price for electricity is $2/MWh (.2¢/kWh).

The price for guaranteed capacity available to HQ during the winter months (November-March) is not set by the amount of electricity exported. Revenues are reported separately in CF(L)Co's financial statements. The value calculated in any year is not publicly available.

PROJECTED PRICES THAT HQ WOULD PAY CF(L)CO UNDER THE MOU:

Projected or forecasted nominal prices for existing electricity from Churchill Falls were provided in information from the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador in early 2025.

The prices referred to are those paid by Hydro-Québec to CF(L)Co, not to NLH. The forecasted prices start at 1.63¢/kWh in 2025 and increase to 37.24¢/kWh in 2075. The effective price of 5.9¢ is the present value of the average prices. We believe that what was intended to be calculated is the average of present value prices. Wade Locke correctly estimates the average present-value price for the period 2025-2075 to be 2.64¢/kWh.

Forecasting electricity prices for any period beyond five years is highly uncertain. Even in the short term, expected dynamic changes in demand due to changing technology make forecasting difficult. It should also be noted that market prices for electricity are usually not set annually in Canada or the northern U.S. states since prices vary by season and are affected by climate change. The forecast prices in the MOU are based on a lower bound, as prices under the MOU may increase depending on replacement rates and future electricity prices experienced by Hydro-Québec. Details of the adjustment process are not available and can therefore be ignored in the analysis here. Moreover, neither the MOU nor HQ nor NLH provides any information on how the initial prices (or any others) were determined. In calculating the present values, a nominal discount rate of 5.822% was used. How this value was determined is not explained!

It is also important to note that the proposed pricing structure for existing power under the MOU replaces the current price that HQ pays, 0.2¢/kWh, and the revenue that HQ pays under the Guaranteed Winter Availability Contract for power during the winter months.

The price that CF(L)Co receives from HQ is a transfer price set under the 1969 agreement between HQ and BRINCO, with some adjustments in 1998 upon the signing of the Guaranteed Winter Availability Contract between HQ and NLH. HQ is the primary recipient of the electricity generated by Churchill Falls. There is no wholesale market price for electricity in Quebec. There is a regulated transfer price between HQ Production and HQ Distribution. Once again, Hydro-Québec is a public utility whose primary purpose is to supply electricity to its customers at the lowest possible cost. It has a dual purpose: a direct social purpose and another as part of its industrial strategy.

PROJECTED REVENUES THAT HQ WOULD PAY CF(L)CO UNDER THE MOU:

NLH and HQ used the forecast prices discussed above to forecast nominal and present-value revenues. Wade Locke, in his Assessment, presents the forecasted revenue that HQ will pay CF(L)Co over the proposed contract period (2025-2075). One assumes that NLH and HQ forecast these revenues using prices and the amounts of power purchased by HQ. It would have been helpful if the monthly electricity purchase amounts for HQ had been made available. Forecasted monthly values would also be beneficial. Basic hydraulic turbine electric production data from both HQ and NLH attest to the wide variation in production, which usually peaks in January, the coldest month and therefore the one when demand is highest. The reduction in Quebec's electricity production by HQ from its hydroelectric plants since 2022 due to the drought is well known. Less well known is the reduction in electricity production from hydroelectric plants in Newfoundland and Labrador in 2025. It is not certain which generating stations this is occurring in. The key point to stress is that the forecasted revenues under the MOU are subject to uncertainty regarding future prices and production.

From Locke's annual revenue estimates, an increase occurs in 2036. It is not clear why this happens. The associated yearly present-value revenue figures are shown in Figure 5. Once again, one can question where the discount rate came from.

PROJECTED REVENUES AND PROFITS THAT NLH MIGHT RECEIVE FROM CF(L)CO UNDER THE MOU:

Locke estimates that the NLH would receive $13.1 billion in revenue from 2025 through the end of 2041, or an annual average of $768 million. We note a substantial increase in revenue around 2036.

This increase in revenue would likely increase the potential profits of the NLH's stake in CF(L)Co. As Locke shows in his Table 10, CF(L)Co currently makes a profit and has done so in the years he examined from 2014 to 2023. It has done so even though the current price that HQ pays CF(L)Co for electricity is well below its opportunity cost on open markets. Churchill Falls is what the industry knows as a "legacy" project. Its capital costs were repaid some time ago, and its primary source of energy, water, is essentially free. A simple calculation of expenses relative to revenues shows that the cost as a percentage of revenues has fallen over the period Locke examined. Hydro generation stations have a very long expected life. Eventually, they do have to be replaced, and that can be a costly process. Churchill Falls' expected lifetime would typically be around 2075, the end year of the proposed contract.

===== TIMELINES AND PROJECTED PRICES AND REVENUES BEYOND 2041 =====

An important consideration is the timelines involved in the MOU and the 1969 contract. Essentially, Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro, as well as the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, is bound by the terms of the 1968 contract and any subsequent agreements with Hydro-Quebec or the government of Quebec. The MOU proposes to amend the terms of the above agreements to increase benefits to NLH and GNL during the period from 2025 to 2041, the expiry date of the 1969 contract. The benefit to NLH and GNL is an increase in the annual price of electricity generated by Churchill Falls during this period and therefore potentially the associated revenue. In exchange, the GNL agrees to extend the set payments for existing power until 2075. While NLH will have access to more power for its own use, this is conditional upon NL needing the power. If it does not require the power, then HQ has the right of first refusal.

The proposed price scheme includes an upgrade to replace the existing turbines at Churchill Falls.

The proposed prices in the MOU for existing power from CF come with a "hidden cost". Economists would label this as an opportunity cost, that is, the loss of a potential gain in value if the MOU is accepted for the period from 2042 to 2075. The cost would equal the value of the electricity sold during that period in the best alternative. For the sake of argument, we know that NL power is sold into the New England market, and HQ selects this market to be the primary one to explain the value of its export sales. The average export price of power in this market for NL power from January to October was 7.86¢/kWh. This average is not the relevant one for our calculation of opportunity cost. My guidance comes from discussions I had with Angus Bruneau, who was the founding Dean of Engineering at Memorial University. Angus argued that the Smallwood Reservoir was a large storage battery and should be used to generate power to maximize revenue from exporting it. This could vary daily and seasonally. This principle is the same one that HQ uses on export sales to New England and New York. It is likely to be the one also used with respect to any power surplus to Quebec's needs from the proposed infrastructure projects (to be discussed later). The concept of opportunity cost is not foreign to electricity management, which would use terms such as "dynamic pricing" and "prudent management". Optimally, power would be exported during the day, when demand is highest, and in the colder months of winter and the hotter months of summer. In this context, the relevant winter price was about 8.98¢/kWh in the summer and 18.56¢/kWh in the winter. These are 2025 prices and are likely to be relatively higher in 2024, even assuming inflation, given the increasing electricity demand. The counterargument is that a price escalation process has been suggested without specifics. Any calculation of opportunity cost would not include HQ regulated transfer prices.

SECTION SUMMARY:

The prices proposed under the MOU will increase Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro's profits at Churchill Falls. Any estimate of the increase in value becomes more uncertain the further out in time one goes. It must be remembered that the prices refer to those received by CF(L)Co and not the NL Treasury. The projected revenue also depends on the projected electricity output from CF, which may well be affected by climate change. There are significant hidden opportunity costs or opportunities lost beyond 2041.

===== COST-BENEFIT ANALYSES, CAPITAL BUDGETING ANALYSIS, AND GENERAL WELL-BEING =====

Capital Budgeting Analysis uses net present value techniques, internal rate of return analysis or payback periods to determine the profitability of a profit-maximizing investment. Some energy economists argue that NPV should not be used alone to evaluate hydroelectric projects. I agree. When borrowing or debt is a significant consideration, a public utility or government guarantor must have access to cash at a reasonable rate to meet any expenditure obligations. Some other objections to using NPV analysis include the long life of hydro projects, in which higher discount rates can reduce the present value of benefits to almost zero. The issue is to what extent the benefits of a natural resource should extend to future generations. Capital budgeting analysis focuses on the contribution of a proposed project to the economic well-being of investors who are deciding now, not on the well-being of future generations. With respect to the Churchill River projects, many impacts are not easily monetized, such as those on indigenous well-being and culture, environmental issues such as drought, and impacts on wildlife and energy security. We have argued that the time frame for the contract, when considering existing prices, is so long that future uncertainty renders it virtually impossible to assign quantitative values to critical variables. Assigning credible, specific values to revenues 15-50 years into the future is misleading, as is the vague promise of some non-specific evaluation adjustment mechanisms. It should also be recognized that 2075 is close to the end of the expected life of the generation station. Decommissioning costs should perhaps be considered in any analysis.

Cost-benefit takes a societal perspective. It is attractive because it seeks to estimate the costs and benefits for various groups in society. For hydro projects, a social discount rate would be more appropriate, since a greater weight could be given to future generations or to the value that the current generation places on future events in their lifetimes.

Both approaches are necessary but insufficient for evaluation, since economic well-being is one domain of overall societal well-being. It is this perspective that has been adopted for Newfoundland and Labrador's System of Community Accounts.

THE IMPACT OF PROJECTED PRICES AND REVENUES IN THE MOU ON SOCIETAL WELL-BEING FOR NL:

At first cut, the impact evaluation is relatively straightforward. The impacts are targeted at the provincial government. Some commentators in Quebec argue that the increase in economic value to the provincial government is critical for a government that is burdened by a large debt. It should be noted that NLH has a large debt associated with its activities, and many smaller communities have large municipal debts coupled with a declining older population. The warnings made previously now apply. Those warnings relate to uncertainty about the benefits as the time is expanded. Estimates about the cumulative present value of revenues flowing to the provincial government are ignored.

This potential and uncertain impact says nothing about a potential BATNA (Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement) where the negotiated agreement is the MOU.

Nothing is said about the direct impacts on other groups, since those do not appear to be covered in NLH's analyses.

===== ALLOCATION OF ELECTRICITY UNDER EXISTING FALLS CAPACITY =====

As part of the MOU, the amount of electricity made available to NL from existing Churchill Falls-generated power will increase starting around 2030, rising from 4.0 TWh per year to 10 TWh in 2061. Correspondingly, the amount of electricity available to Quebec will fall. We can assume that roughly 34 TWh are generated annually, but recognize that there are year-to-year variations. I have noticed that hydroelectric generation in NL in 2025 has declined from 2024 levels, but I do not know which generating stations accounted for this decline. In any event, there is a potential gain to NL from this arrangement, depending on the specifics of the contract and the impact of climate change on electricity production from CF. As an aside, an Environmental Assessment was conducted in 2012; however, the experience of hydro production in Quebec since 2023 and the experience of NLH this year should call for a review of that assessment.

A warning is that should NL not need its allocation outlined above, the HQ would have the right of first refusal. Given this right, it is essential for analysis purposes to obtain data on the amount of electricity generated each month by CF, the amount exported to Hydro-Québec, and the price per MWh.

===== CAPITAL BUDGETING ANALYSES, COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS AND IMPACTS ON GENERAL WELL-BEING ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROPOSED PROJECTS FOR NL =====

There are four proposed new infrastructure projects covered in the MOU. A review of these projects was discussed in a previous video. Wade Locke also covers these projects in more detail in his Assessment. The financing of the four projects will be 25% equity and 75% debt. The transmission line project is 100% the responsibility of NLH; 65.8% for the upgrade and expansion at Churchill Falls, and 60% at Gull Island. NLH is responsible for any cost overruns associated with the transmission line and 65.8% of the cost overruns associated with the upgrade. As Locke points out, Quebec will assist conditionally with the equity obligations for those projects in which it is not 100% responsible, amounting to $4.8 over time. The debt obligations for NLH would be over $17B, assuming no cost overruns, which is a very substantial amount for a small province with current debt management challenges.

Wade focuses on the Gull Island project. He notes that to evaluate this project using net present value analysis, "One would need the time profile of the capital costs, the time profile of operations and maintenance costs, the transmission costs, the production profile for electricity and the time profile price expected for the electricity flowing from Gull Island to HQ (equal to 84% of the output in the MOU) and NLH (16% of the output in the MOU)." These data are not available in the MOU.

It should also be noted that NLH has informed me that water rents will be "modernized". Presumably, these would apply to the Gull Island project, but would they also apply to other projects? We do not know, nor do we know the value of such rents. Such rents are critical to calculating the costs associated with hydroelectric projects, since the very low competitive expenses related to these projects stem from the historical fact that water was supplied, basically for free. Another factor explaining the low cost is that capital costs are spread over the very long life of dams, which may be up to 100 years. In the case of Churchill Falls, this would be 2075, the end date of the MOU for existing power from Churchill Falls.

The warnings given earlier about the limitations of capital budgeting analysis, which calculates the NPV of a hydroelectric investment project, should be heeded here.

With respect to Gull Island and the other proposed infrastructure projects, Hydro-Quebec likely views them as securing additional supply for an extended period at a very low cost. In terms of the NL Government document, Gull Island, along with the other proposed projects and the extension of the CF agreement, "make(s) a substantial contribution to Quebec's energy security". Locke points out that 10% of the power from Gull Island flows to NLH. From a cost-benefit perspective, these projects increase the economic well-being of Quebecers. General well-being may also be improved, knowing that this is a "green" source of energy in production. As argued in other videos, HQ is behaving like a cost-minimizer, passing on savings to households and businesses as part of its industrial strategy. HQ's behaviour is consistent with societal values and political values.

Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro's behaviour with respect to the projects is much harder to understand. If its behaviour mimicked Hydro-Quebec's in its export markets with New Brunswick and the northeastern states, then NLH would behave like a profit-maximizer in a commercial agreement and use the profits to lower electricity costs for NL households and as part of an industrial strategy. It does not do so.

The major unknown is the value of water rents/royalties. Given the current information, we assume that these are basically zero. Forgetting about the potential environmental externalities, then why would you give away such a resource? The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador does not give away its oil resources, so why water?

The size of the debt, its cost, and the timing of debt payments must be significant concerns for the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador and the province's residents, given the size of the current debt. Necessary expenditures on health or education could be crowded out by interest payments, especially in the early years.

A target rate of return on equity between 8% and 9% would indicate that the price received for the power is a controlled price rather than a market price. How was this return calculated?

Under the MOU, Locke notes that additional power would be made available to NLH over the contract period, from about 167 TWh to 474 TWh. This increase is substantial. As Wade states, it "should facilitate industrial development". Whether it will and to what extent is unknown. Since HQ has the right of first refusal, one could expect that it is in Quebec's interests to compete for such development.

An additional benefit for Newfoundland and Labrador is the 3,000 direct annual jobs, while the projects will be developed over a period of five to eleven years. Priority will be given to Newfoundlanders and Labradorians and to indigenous residents. Estimating labour impacts for Exxon Mobil's initial Hibernia development is a complex task that requires detailed knowledge of provincial occupational supply and engineering demand over time. Making casual statements is misleading. Construction trades are likely to face a tight supply due to numerous projects nationwide and possibly in the province.

While there is a general focus on labour impacts of these development projects, one should also consider the business impacts by province, as well as some indirect and induced effects.

===== CONCLUSIONS =====

While an initial review concluded that the MOU was potentially transformative, a more thorough examination has revealed a severe lack of information which would permit an adequate evaluation of the proposals. The current evaluation method, which was applied very sparingly, raised legitimate concerns when applied to a public project focused on societal values.

Of genuine concern relates to the valuation and the importance of water, as well as the reasons why Newfoundland and Labrador would take such a significant equity stake in projects that are not consistent with this province's societal values, but that of Quebec. This is especially true when there are substantial concerns with the province's current debt situation. Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro and the Government must re-evaluate the corporation's societal values.

Finally, the Government must produce a BATNA (Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement) for the MOU. This alternative should not extend the agreement for existing power beyond 2041. It must provide specifics on how to relate the export of power to competitive markets rather than to regulated cost-minimizing transfer prices. Like Hydro-Quebec, any "profits" should be used to support societal values as defined by the government.

===== KEY POINTS =====

CLAUDINE BOUCHARD QUOTE:
"This is a commercial agreement that we made, not a political agreement." - Hydro-Québec CEO (Nov. 19, 2025)

SOCIETAL VALUES FRAMEWORK:
- HQ and NLH are public utilities (Crown Corporations) serving societal values, not commercial ones
- Value should be defined in societal terms (well-being), not purely commercial terms
- Reference: Mark Carney's book "Value(s)"

PRICING STRUCTURE:
- Current price: 0.2¢/kWh
- MOU forecasted prices: 1.63¢/kWh (2025) to 37.24¢/kWh (2075)
- Wade Locke's calculation: Average present-value price 2.64¢/kWh
- Discount rate used: 5.822% nominal (method unexplained)

OPPORTUNITY COSTS BEYOND 2041:
- NL power export prices to New England: 7.86¢/kWh average
- Dynamic pricing potential: 8.98¢/kWh (summer), 18.56¢/kWh (winter) in 2025
- "Hidden cost" of extending contract to 2075

ELECTRICITY ALLOCATION:
- NL allocation increases from 4.0 TWh/year to 10 TWh by 2061
- HQ has right of first refusal if NL doesn't need its allocation
- Churchill Falls generates roughly 34 TWh annually

PROPOSED PROJECTS FINANCING:
- 25% equity, 75% debt structure
- NLH debt obligations: Over $17B (assuming no cost overruns)
- Significant concern for debt-challenged province
- 3,000 direct annual jobs during 5-11 year development period

WATER RENTS/ROYALTIES:
- NLH informed that water rents will be "modernized"
- Current value unknown
- Dr. May questions: "Why would you give away such a resource? The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador does not give away its oil resources, so why water?"

BATNA RECOMMENDATION:
Dr. May concludes government must produce a Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement (BATNA) that:
- Does not extend agreement for existing power beyond 2041
- Provides specifics on exporting power to competitive markets
- Uses "profits" to support societal values (like Hydro-Quebec does)